Gwendolyn Avril Coleridge-Taylor (8 March 1903 – 21 December 1998) was an English pianist , conductor , and composer . She was the daughter of composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor and his wife Jessie (née Walmisley). She was born in South Norwood , London , the daughter of composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor and his wife Jessie Walmisley. They had met as students at the Royal College of Music . She had an older brother Hiawatha. Gwendolyn wrote her first composition, Goodbye Butterfly , at the age of twelve. Later, she won a scholarship for composition and piano at Trinity College of Music in 1915, where she was taught by Gordon Jacob and Alec Rowley.  In 1933, Coleridge-Taylor made her debut as a conductor at the Royal Albert Hall . She was the first female conductor of H.M.S. Royal Marines and a frequent guest conductor of the BBC Orchestra and the London Symphony Orchestra . She was the founder and conductor of both the Coleridge-Taylor Symphony Orchestra and its accompanying musical society in the 1940s, as well as the Malcolm Sargent Symphony Orchestra. Her compositions include large-scale orchestral works, as well as songs, keyboard, and chamber music . In 1957, Coleridge-Taylor wrote the Ceremonial March to celebrate Ghana 's independence.  Her other well-regarded works include a Piano Concerto in F minor ( Sussex Landscape, The Hills, To April, In Memoriam R.A.F. ), Wyndore (Windover) for choir and orchestra, and Golden Wedding Ballet Suite for orchestra. She dropped her first name after a divorce, thereafter going by Avril professionally. She had a tour of South Africa in 1952, during the period of apartheid .  Originally she was supportive of, or neutral to the racial segregation ; she was taken as white as she was at least three-quarters white in ancestry.  When the government learned that she was one-quarter black (her paternal grandfather was a Creole from Sierra Leone), it would not allow her to work as a composer or conductor.  She also published compositions under the pseudonym Peter Riley. 