Paul Creston (born Giuseppe Guttoveggio ; October 10, 1906 – August 24, 1985) was an Italian American composer of classical music . Born in New York City to Sicilian immigrants, Creston was self-taught as a composer. He was an honorary member of Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia music fraternity, initiated into the national honorary Alpha Alpha chapter. His work tends to be fairly conservative in style, with a strong rhythmic element. His pieces include six symphonies , a number of concertos , including two for violin ,  one for marimba and orchestra  (premiered by Ruth Stuber ), one for one piano, one for two pianos , one for accordion and one for alto saxophone (the latter dedicated to Cecil Leeson ),  a fantasia for trombone and orchestra (composed for and premiered by Robert Marsteller ), and a Rapsodie again for alto saxophone - written for Jean-Marie Londeix . He also wrote a suite (1935) and a sonata (op. 19, 1939) for alto saxophone and piano (both dedicated to Cecil Leeson ),   as well as a suite for organ , Op. 70.  Several of his works were inspired by the poetry of Walt Whitman . He died in Poway, California , a suburb of San Diego  . Creston was one of the most performed American composers of the 1940s and 1950s.  Several of his works have become staples of the wind band repertoire. Zanoni , Prelude and Dance and the Celebration Overture have been and still are on several state lists for contests across the USA. Creston was also a notable teacher, with the composers Irwin Swack , John Corigliano , Elliott Schwartz , Frank Felice , and Charles Roland Berry , accordionist/composer William Schimmel and the jazz musicians Rusty Dedrick and Charlie Queener among his pupils. See: List of music students by teacher: C to F#Paul Creston . He wrote the theoretical books Principles of Rhythm (1964) and Rational Metric Notation (1979).  He taught at Central Washington State College from 1968-1975.  In 2008 Marco Ciccone had done a version for saxophone and orchestra of the Sonata op.19 (© 2008 by Templeton Publishing, a div. of Shawnee Press, Inc.).