Madeleine Winefride Isabelle Dring (7 September 1923 – 26 March 1977) was an English composer and actress. Madeleine Dring spent the first four years of her life at Raleigh Road, Harringay when the family moved to Streatham. She showed talent at an early age began lessons in the junior department of the Royal College of Music beginning on her tenth birthday. She attended the school with scholarships for violin and piano. As part of their training, all of the students performed in the children's theatre. She formally began composition studies at the RCMJD with Stanley Drummond Wolff in 1937, continued the next year with Leslie Fly, and the next two with Percy Buck . She continued at the Royal College for senior-level studies, where her composition teacher was Herbert Howells . She dropped the study of violin after the death of her instructor, W.H. Reed, at the end of the first year. She also studied mime, drama, and singing. Dring's love of theatre and music co-mingled happily; many of her earliest professional creations were for the stage, radio, and television. In 1947 she married Roger Lord who served as Principal Oboist with London Symphony Orchestra for thirty years. She composed several works for Roger, including the highly regarded Dances for solo oboe. Soon after her marriage, her first pieces were published with Lengnick and with Oxford (1948). The Lords had one son in 1950. A book Madeleine Dring: Her Music, Her Life by Ro Hancock-Child, was published in 2000 (2nd edition 2009), with cartoon illustrations from Dring's own notebooks. The effort was funded by a grant from Dring's husband, Roger Lord, in an effort to disseminate information about his former wife.  Several articles, compact disc recordings and inclusions of Dring's biographical information in books about composers in the last decade have secured her name a place in the modern lexicon.  Dring died in 1977 of a cerebral hemorrhage. Despite some confusion about her final resting place, Dring's grave was recently "uncovered" at Lambeth Cemetery in Streatham. Both Roger and their son Jeremy passed away in 2014. Roger died at age 90 and Jeremy died of ALS. A student of Ralph Vaughan Williams on the rare occasion, Dring's relationship with RVW has been exaggerated. Madeleine Dring's style is unpretentious. Her music seems to never imitate itself from piece to piece, always finding a fresh approach to harmony and rhythm. Her vocal music has been compared to Roger Quilter (possibly because of similar text choices), and her most serious songs are highly sophisticated. Her songs are at all times lyrical and the words are superbly set. The last ten years of her life were spent writing art songs for her eyes only. They were published posthumously by her husband, Roger. Her cabaret songs and West End Revue material sometimes featured her own lyrics and are full of clever writing, both musically and textually. They have recently been given recordings and put into published form. Dring avoided large-scale works. Most of her output was in shorter forms; she wrote a good deal of solo piano, songs with piano, and some chamber music, as well as many pedagogical works, including pieces for piano, piano duo, recorder, and clarinet. She completed a one-act opera, Cupboard Love (finally published in 2017) with her friend D.F. Aitken, and a dance drama entitled The Fair Queen of Wu, which was broadcast on BBC Television in 1951. She was commissioned to write music for "The Real Princess," a ballet and for several stage plays in London given from 1946 to 1971. She often collaborated with Felicity Gray, choreographer and D.F. Aitken, librettist. Simon William Lord , Dring's grandson, used some of her compositions for tracks on his solo 'Lord Skywave' album. Dring rarely provided dates for her compositions; many dates come from Alistair Fisher's treatise on her songs. Publication dates have been provided, most of which are posthumously published by her husband, Roger Lord. Some dates have more recently been re-established using dates of first performances and other information as confirmed in Dring's personal papers as well as in archival newspaper reviews. In 2018 25 songs were engraved and published as well as 14 cabaret numbers.