Ferdinand III (13 July 1608 – 2 April 1657) was Holy Roman Emperor from 15 February 1637 until his death, as well as King of Hungary and Croatia , King of Bohemia and Archduke of Austria. Ferdinand was born in Graz , the eldest son of Emperor Ferdinand II of Habsburg and his first wife, Maria Anna of Bavaria . Educated by the Jesuits, he became Archduke of Austria in 1621, King of Hungary in 1625, and King of Bohemia in 1627. In 1627 Ferdinand enhanced his authority and set an important legal and military precedent by issuing a Revised Land Ordinance that deprived the Bohemian estates of their right to raise soldiers, reserving this power solely for the monarch.  Following the death of Albrecht von Wallenstein (who had previously denied him the overall military command of the Catholic side) in 1634, he was made titular head of the Imperial Army in the Thirty Years' War . Later that year he joined with his cousin, the Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand , who was nominally responsible for the capture of Donauwörth and Regensburg , and for the defeat of the Swedes at the Battle of Nördlingen . Leader of the peace party at court, he helped negotiate the Peace of Prague with the Protestant states, especially Saxony in 1635. Having been elected King of the Romans in 1636, he succeeded his father as Holy Roman Emperor in 1637. He hoped to make peace soon with France and Sweden, but the war dragged on, finally ending in 1648 with the Peace of Westphalia (Treaty of Münster with France, Treaty of Osnabrück with Sweden), negotiated by his envoy Maximilian von und zu Trauttmansdorff , a diplomat who had been made a count in 1623 by his father Ferdinand II. During the last  period of the war, in 1644 Ferdinand III gave all rulers of German states the right to conduct their own foreign policy ( ius belli ac pacis ) – the emperor hoped to gain more allies in the negotiations with France and Sweden. This edict, however, contributed to the gradual erosion of the imperial authority in the Holy Roman Empire. After 1648 the emperor was engaged in carrying out the terms of the treaty and ridding Germany of the foreign soldiery. In 1656 he sent an army into Italy to assist Spain in her struggle with France, and he had just concluded an alliance with Poland to check the aggressions of Charles X of Sweden when he died on 2 April 1657. On 20 February 1631, Ferdinand III married his first wife, Maria Anna of Spain (1606–1646). She was the youngest daughter of Philip III of Spain and Margaret of Austria . They were first cousins, as Maria Anna's mother was a sister of Ferdinand's father. They were parents to six children: On 2 July 1648 in Linz , Ferdinand III married his second wife, Archduchess Maria Leopoldine of Austria (1632–1649). She was a daughter of Leopold V, Archduke of Austria , and Claudia de' Medici . They were first cousins as male-line grandchildren of Charles II, Archduke of Austria , and Maria Anna of Bavaria . They had a single son: On 30 April 1651, Ferdinand III married Eleonora Gonzaga . She was a daughter of Charles IV Gonzaga, Duke of Rethel . They were parents to four children: Ferdinand III was a well-known patron of music and a composer. He studied music under Giovanni Valentini , who bequeathed his musical works to him, and had close ties with Johann Jakob Froberger , one of the most important keyboard composers of the 17th century. Froberger lamented the emperor's death and dedicated to him one of his most celebrated works, Lamentation faite sur la mort très douloureuse de Sa Majesté Impériale, Ferdinand le troisième ; a tombeau for Ferdinand III's death was composed by the renowned violinist Johann Heinrich Schmelzer . Some of Ferdinand's own compositions survive in manuscripts: masses, motets, hymns and other sacred music, as well as a few secular pieces. His Drama musicum was praised by Athanasius Kircher , and the extant works, although clearly influenced by Valentini, show a composer with an individual style and a solid technique.  Recordings of Ferdinand's compositions include: Ferdinand III, by the grace of God elected Holy Roman Emperor, forever August, King of Germany, King of Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia, Slavonia, Rama, Serbia, Galicia, Lodomeria, Cumania and Bulgaria, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, Margrave of Moravia, Duke of Luxemburg, of the Higher and Lower Silesia, of Württemberg and Teck, Prince of Swabia, Count of Habsburg, Tyrol, Kyburg and Goritia, Marquess of the Holy Roman Empire, Burgovia, the Higher and Lower Lusace, Lord of the Marquisate of Slavonia, of Port Naon and Salines, etc. etc.