Ferdinand Fränzl (20 May 1767 in Schwetzingen – 27 October 1833 in Mannheim ) was a German violinist , composer , conductor, opera director, and a representative of the third generation of the so-called Mannheim school . The quality of his violin playing must have been comparable to his father’s who in turn was one of the best violinists of his generation. The violinist and composer Louis Spohr , however, who heard him at least twice already in 1810 judged Fränzl’s playing as old-fashioned, reminiscent of a bygone era; he also criticised Fränzel’s impure tone. Fränzl’s first teacher was his father Ignaz Fränzl , a competent composer himself and one of the foremost violinists of his day. Ferdinand entered the Mannheim court orchestra in 1782. Already in 1785 he went on his first concert tour. Although already an accomplished virtuoso, Fränzl (probably supervised by his father) rounded off his education in Strasbourg . Here he received lessons in composition and counterpoint form Franz Xaver Richter and Ignaz Pleyel . The two, as disparate as they were, made a good pair of teachers for the young Fränzl. Richter, probably already a teacher of Ferdinand Fränzl’s father, was a conservative contrapuntist of the old school widely respected for his sacred music. Pleyel was a Haydn pupil and already a successful, renowned and modern composer of chamber music and symphonies. Fränzel finally added some international touch to his musical education in Paris (1787) and Bologna (1788). In 1789 he was named concertmaster of the Munich court orchestra, successor to the Mannheim court orchestra. After only two years in Munich he relocated to Frankfurt am Main (1792) where he assumed the post of concertmaster at the Frankfurt national theatre. During the same time he undertook extended concert tours to England and Russia. In 1806 he succeeded Carl Cannabich as director of the instrumental music of the Munich court orchestra. The German violinist and composer Louis Spohr, certainly a competent judge in music matters, met Ferdinand Fränzl during a concert tour to Russia.
Spohr attend a concert by Fränzl in May 1802. Despite some feeble attempts at polite praise, Spohr’s impression of Fränzl was predominantly negative: This is one of the best accounts we have of the violin playing of a representative (albeit a later one) of the Mannheim school. What Spohr writes is all the more convincing because he himself was the pupil of a Mannheim violinist. Moreover, Spohr, as the leading German violinist of his generation and of one generation later than Ferdinand Fränzl, was as good a judge as any when it came to appraising violin playing.