Johann Andreas Amon (1763 – March 29, 1825) was a German virtuoso guitarist , horn player , violist , conductor and composer .  Amon composed around eighty works, including symphonies, concerti, sonatas, and songs. He also wrote two masses, various liturgical works, and two operettas. Amon was born at Bamberg , Bavaria in 1763, being first instructed in singing by the court singer Madame Fracassini. During this period he was also studying the guitar and the violin under Bauerle, a musician of local repute. Young Amon had the misfortune to lose his voice at a very early age and his parents then desired him to study the horn. He was placed under Giovanni Punto, one of the most celebrated masters of this instrument, and he obtained extraordinary skill upon it.  Previous to 1781 he had visited England as a horn player and in that year, when eighteen years of age, he went with his teacher Giovanni Punto in Paris. After studying with Punto, Amon continued his studies in composition under Antonio Sacchini in 1781. Amon remained in Paris, as a pupil of Sacchini, for the space of two years and then toured with his former teacher, Punto. They travelled throughout France and appeared as a horn duo with great success, and in 1784 arrived in Strasburg. He accepted an engagement in Strasburg and remained in that city for some time and then undertook another extended tour, which included all the important cities of eastern Europe. Amon traveled with Punto, often leading his orchestra, until 1789, when he became the musical director at Heilbronn . Amon's excellent playing both of the horn and guitar brought him before the notice of Haydn, Mozart, and many other influential musicians which added considerably to his reputation. In 1789 his health was such that he was compelled to relinquish the playing of the horn, and he then devoted himself to teaching the guitar 
and piano.  The same year he was engaged as musical director at Heilbronn and on May 6, 1817 he received the appointment of kapellmeister to the Prince of Oettingen-Wallerstein . At his application at the court of Wallerstein, Amon remarked that he had composed more than 80 works, all printed. In August he was awarded the title of "Master for the chapel." He continued in this position until his death at Wallerstein, Bavaria in 1825.  Throughout this period in his life, he was a teacher of the guitar and piano. He was very popular, and the number of celebrated pupils he trained was considerable. At the time of his death he was completing a requiem and mass, and the former composition was performed by the members of the Royal Chapel at his funeral obsequies. He was mourned by a daughter and four sons, one of the latter, Ernest, having also published compositions for the flute and orchestra.  Amon was a very prolific composer and his published works embrace all classes of music. He was the writer of two operas, one of which, The Sultan Wampou, performed in 1791, obtained marked success, and also numerous symphonies, quartets, concertos and solos for the guitar and piano, and songs with guitar accompaniment. Upon his early compositions he styles himself "a pupil of Punto." His vocal works with guitar accompaniment were very popular in his native land, and he published many volumes, each containing six songs. Bone states that Amon's instrumental works are immeasurably superior to his vocal compositions, and are compactly and clearly designed. 