Otto Moritz David Goldschmidt (21 August 1829 – 24 February 1907) was a German composer, conductor and pianist, known for his piano concertos and other piano pieces.  He married the "Swedish Nightingale", soprano Jenny Lind . Goldschmidt was born in Hamburg , Germany, and his parents were salesman Moritz David Goldschmidt and women's rights activist Johanna Goldschmidt . He had seven siblings, and his wealthy and well-educated parents belonged to the community of liberal Reform Jews in Germany. Since his mother was musically gifted – an excellent singer, pianist, violinist and harpist – she focused on the musical education of her children. Goldschmidt attended the Conservatory in Leipzig from 1843 to 1846 where he studied under Hans von Bülow , Felix Mendelssohn and Moritz Hauptmann . From Mendelssohn, Goldschmidt received this student certificate: "Mr. Goldschmidt has developed a fine talent for piano playing in gratifying manner and also has shown not insignificant talent in composition for his instrument."  Additionally, he took private piano lessons with Clara Schumann . On 5 February 1852, Goldschmidt married the world-famous soprano Jenny Lind in Boston, Massachusetts .  To please his wife, he converted to become Episcopalian .  They had three children. From 1858, they lived in London where Otto became a professor in 1863 and later vocal director at the Royal Academy of Music . In 1863, Goldschmidt and William Sterndale Bennett compiled the Chorale Book of England .  In 1876, he founded the Bach Choir , which he led until 1886. He several times conducted the famous Lower Rhine festivals at Düsseldorf . After the death of his wife in 1887, Goldschmidt released her biography Jenny Lind. Ihre Laufbahn als Künstlerin (Jenny Lind: Her Career as an Artist).  Goldschmidt died in London in 1907 at the age of 77. Goldschmidt wrote  a piano concerto , and other piano pieces, songs and trios. In his oratorio Ruth , his wife sang the soprano part at the 1870 premiere, the last performance of her career. 