Georg Martin Adolf von Henselt (9 or 12 May 1814 – 10 October 1889) was a German composer and virtuoso pianist . Henselt was born at Schwabach , in Bavaria . At the age of three he began to learn the violin, and at five the piano under Josepha von Fladt. With financial help from King Ludwig I of Bavaria , he studied under Johann Nepomuk Hummel in Weimar for some months. In 1832, he went to Vienna , where, besides studying composition under Simon Sechter (the later teacher of Anton Bruckner ), he was successful as a concert pianist.  In 1836, to improve his health, he made a prolonged tour through the chief German towns. In 1837, he settled at Breslau , where he had married Rosalie Vogel—but the following year migrated to Saint Petersburg , where previous visits made him welcome. He became court pianist and inspector of musical studies in the Imperial Institute of Female Education , and was ennobled in 1876. Henselt usually spent summer holidays in Germany. In 1852, and again in 1867, he visited England, though in the latter year he made no public appearance.  Saint Petersburg was his home nearly until his death from cardiac disease during a stay at Warmbrunn , Germany (now in Poland ). To some ears, Henselt's playing combined Franz Liszt 's sonority with Hummel's smoothness. It was full of poetry, remarkable for his use of extended chords and technique.  His cantabile playing was highly regarded. "Find out the secret of Henselt's hands," Liszt told his pupils.  Once he commented on the lengths Henselt took to achieve his famous legato , saying, "I could have had velvet paws like that if I had wanted to." Henselt's influence on the next generation of Russian pianists is immense. Henselt's playing and teaching greatly influenced the Russian school of music, developing from seeds planted by John Field . Sergei Rachmaninoff held him in very great esteem, and considered him one of his most important influences. He excelled in his own works and in those of Carl Maria von Weber and Frédéric Chopin . His Piano Concerto in F minor, Op. 16  was once frequently played in Europe, and of his many valuable studies,  Étude in F-sharp major Si oiseau j'étais was very popular. At one time Henselt was second to Anton Rubinstein in the direction of the Saint Petersburg Conservatory .  However, despite his relatively long life, Henselt ceased nearly all composition by the age of thirty. The reasons are unclear. Chronic stage fright , bordering on paranoia , caused him to withdraw from concert appearances by age thirty-three. (selective list)