Friedrich Heinrich Himmel (November 20, 1765 – June 8, 1814) was a German composer . Himmel was born at Treuenbrietzen in Brandenburg , Prussia , and originally studied theology at Halle before turning to music. During a temporary stay at Potsdam he had an opportunity of showing his self-acquired skill as a pianist before King Frederick William II , who thereupon made him a yearly allowance to enable him to complete his musical studies. This he did under Johann Gottlieb Naumann , a German composer of the Italian school, and the style of that school Himmel himself adopted in his serious operas . The first of these, a pastoral opera, Il primo navigatore , was produced at Venice in 1794 with great success. In 1792 he went to Berlin , where his oratorio Isaaco was produced, in consequence of which he was made court Kapellmeister to the king of Prussia, and in that capacity wrote a great deal of official music, including cantatas , and a coronation Te Deum . His Italian operas, successively composed for Stockholm , St Petersburg and Berlin , were all received with great favor in their day. Of greater importance than these is a Singspiel to words by Kotzebue , called Fanchon . Himmel's gift of writing genuine simple melody is also observable in his Lieder , including An Alexis send ich dich ( To Alexis ).  He died in Berlin. • Alessandro (1799) • Vasco di Gama ( 1801) • Frohsinn und Schwarmerei (1801) 2 masses, Te Deum for 4 voices and orchestra, Salve Regina for 4 voices and instruments, Beatus vir for 4 voices and instruments, In exitu Israel,
Dixit Dominus, Das Vertrauen auf Gott (cantata), Das Lob Gottes (Singet dem Herrn), Lobe den Herren for choir and orchestra, Psalmen Davids for 2 voices and orchestra,
3 cantatas: Was betrubst du dich, Heilig ist mein Beherrscher, Wann Gott auch aufs Tiefste for choir and orchestra
Trauer-Cantate zur Begräbnissfeyer Friedrich Wilhelm II von Preufsen for 4 voices and orchestra, The 146th psalm, Vater unser von Mahlmann and a few other pieces of church music in manuscript.