Anselm Hüttenbrenner (13 October 1794 – 5 June 1868) was an Austrian composer . He was on friendly terms with both Ludwig van Beethoven —he was one of only two people present at his death—and Franz Schubert , his recollections of whom constitute an interesting but probably unreliable document in Schubertian biographical studies. Hüttenbrenner was born in Graz , the son of a wealthy landowner.  He attended the Graz Lyzeum, and studied law at the University of Graz , but was also composing music at this time. Count Moritz von Fries (1777-1826) was impressed with his ability as a pianist, and following the Count's advice, Hüttenbrenner left in April 1815 for Vienna to study under Antonio Salieri . At that same year [ needs correcting-Beethoven died in 1827 ]he assisted at the death of Ludwig van Beethoven , who received him with unusual words: "I am not worthy that you do not visit me." Coincidentally, he was also present on 26 March 1827, when Beethoven died. Besides it was only the last of Beethoven's housekeeper Sali deathbed [needs correcting]. In memory to Hüttenbrenner, the Johann Joseph Fux Conservatory in Graz cut part of Beethoven's hair, which is now in Graz together with his pedigree in the Joanneum Universal Museum.  In addition, owns Beethoven's hair that possessed Hüttenbrenner[ditto] .  His first published works (for piano; and songs) began to appear shortly afterwards, and the String Quartet (Op. 3) came out in 1816. He briefly returned to Graz in 1818, but was back in Vienna the following year, earning a living in a government office. In 1821 Hüttenbrenner inherited the family estate and married. Schubert sent the manuscript of his Unfinished Symphony to Hüttenbrenner, via Hüttenbrenner's brother Josef, around 1823.  The manuscript remained with Hüttenbrenner until Johann Herbeck visited him in Ober-Andritz near Graz in 1865, and took the score away with him back to Vienna, where he conducted the first performance in December 1865. Hüttenbrenner held the post of director of the Steiermärkischer Musikverein from 1825 to 1829.  His Requiem in C minor was performed at Schubert's memorial service on 23 December 1828. He was a follower of Jakob Lorber and from 1840 he participated actively in the put down in writing of what was allegedly dictated to Lorber by God. Hüttenbrenner died in Ober-Andritz at the age of 73. Of Hüttenbrenner's works in manuscript, some are lost, but the majority remained with his descendants until their 2007 donation to the University Library of the University of Music and Performing Arts in Graz, Austria; they can be examined on site, with all items listed in the University Library's searchable online catalog. His works are considered very rich in melody, somewhat operatic.