Peter Janssens (17 June 1934 – 24 December 1998) was a German musician and composer who wrote and performed incidental music for several theatres, and songs and musicals of the genre Neues Geistliches Lied , a pioneer of Sacropop ( de ) . He worked at a German theatre in Buenos Aires, set several works by Ernesto Cardenal to music and composed in 1992 a passion music, in memory of 500 years after the European invasion in Latin America. Born in Telgte , Peter Janssens was the last of nine children and grew up in rural surroundings. He attended the gymnasium Paulinum in Münster .  Janssens studied musicology, sociology and history at the Musikhochschule Köln , graduating as a music educator in 1958.  He continued his studies from 1961 to 1964 at the University of Münster.  He worked as répétiteur at the Theater Münster . From 1966, he composed incidental music for the Schauspielhaus Düsseldorf , the Deutsches Theater in Göttingen , Staatstheater Wiesbaden and the Staatstheater Darmstadt , among others. He was active at the Bad Hersfelder Festspiele , both in the direction and in performing his own pieces,  In 1964/65, he was director of music, composer, pianist and actor at the Deutsche Kammerspiele in Buenos Aires. From 1966, he lectured on song and chanson at the Folkwangschule .  From 1962, Janssens composed religious songs of the genre later called Neues Geistliches Lied , beat masses and later musicals .  He wrote numerous songs, children's songs such as "Herr Uklatsch", and musicals such as Dietrich Bonhoeffer – ein Leben im Widerstand ( Dietrich Bonhoeffer – A Life in Resistance ). He set music to texts by authors such as Alois Albrecht ( de ) , Friedrich Karl Barth ( de ) , Ernesto Cardenal , Jürgen Fliege ( de ) , Rolf Krenzer ( de ) and Wilhelm Willms ( de ) . He introduced the term " Sacropop ( de ) " to Germany, when in 1972 he subtitled his Menschensohn ( Son of Man ) Ein Sacro-Pop-Musical (A sacropop musical).  From 1973, Janssens performed with his musical ensemble Gesangsorchester at the Kirchentag , first in Düsseldorf.  In 1992, he wrote Passion der Eingeborenen ( Passion of the Indigenous ), related to 500 years after the European invasion in Latin America.  He was a member of the association which is now the Textautoren- und Komponistengruppe ( TAKT ). Janssens died in Telgte. His home town named a road after him on 17 June 2004, which would have been his 70th birthday.  The German National Library holds 138 of his compositions,  such as: