Maurice Jaubert (1900–1940) was a French composer. Born in Nice on January 3, 1900, he was the second son of François Jaubert, a lawyer who would become the president of the Nice bar, and of the former Haydée Faraut. He received his high school education at the Lycée Masséna, where he graduated in 1916. During this period, he also enrolled at the Nice Conservatory of music where he studied harmony, counterpoint and piano. He was awarded the first piano prize in 1916. Jaubert left for Paris and studied law and literature at the Sorbonne. When he returned to his native town in 1919, he was the youngest lawyer in France. His first compositions date back this period but soon after he undertook his military service and became officer in engineering. Demobilized in 1922, Jaubert decided to give up law practice and devote all his time to music. The next year, he completed his musical education in Paris with Albert Groz. Jaubert’s compositions at the time include songs, piano pieces, chamber music, and divertissements. He wrote his first stage music in 1925 for a play by Calderon, Le Magicien prodigieux, using the Pleyela. He was then hired by Pleyel to record rolls on the Pleyela, a revolutionary player piano at the time. Indeed, Jaubert was always attracted by technical innovations that could serve his artistic aspirations. While working on this play, he met a young soprano, Marthe Bréga, who would sing most of his vocal composItions. They married in 1926, with Maurice Ravel as Jaubert’s best man. They had a daughter, Françoise, in 1927. In 1929, while pursuing his work for the concert hall and the stage, Maurice Jaubert began writing and conducting for cinema. Among his most important collaborations in the following decade were Alberto Cavalcanti ’s Le Petit Chaperon Rouge ; Jacques and Pierre Prévert’s L'Affaire est dans le sac ; Jean Vigo ’s Zero for Conduct and L’Atalante ; René Clair ’s Quatorze Juillet and Le Dernier Milliardaire ; Julien Duvivier ’s Carnet de bal (Life Dances On) and La Fin du Jour (The End of a Day); Henri Storck ’s Belgian documentaries LÎle de Pâques and Regards sur la Belgique ancienne ; and Marcel Carné ’s Drôle de drame , Hôtel du Nord , Quai des brumes (Port of Shadows), and Le Jour se lève (Daybreak). Although he understood and appreciated film, scoring them was but one of Jaubert's creative activities. As music director of Pathé-Nathan studio, he conducted the film scores of several other composers, including Arthur Honegger and Darius Milhaud . He regularly conducted at concerts in France and abroad. His writings comprise articles and lectures, as well as a large number of letters that capture his political opinions. how he viewed his times, and his musical tastes (for example, he was a strong supporter of Kurt Weill when that composer was widely misunderstood). War, however, disrupted Jaubert's artistic path. Mobilized on September 1939, he joined an engineering company he would command as a reserve captain. His letters to his wife reflect a spirit of sacrifice tinged with deep humanism. Jaubert did not live to his last two compositions, written at his base camp. Fatally wounded in action, he died a few hours later at the Baccarat Hospital on June 19, 1940. Biography attributed to Emmanuel Chamboredon from Milan Records. Maurice Jaubert played a small role as an orchestra conductor in La Nuit de décembre de Kurt Bernhardt , produced in 1939 .