Calixa Lavallée (December 28, 1842 – January 21, 1891) was a French-Canadian - American musician and Union Army band musician during the American Civil War . He is best known for composing the music for " O Canada ," which officially became the national anthem of Canada in 1980, after a vote in the Senate and the House of Commons . The same 1980 Act of Parliament also changed some of the English lyrics. A slight alteration to the English lyrics was made again in 2018. The original French lyrics and the music, however, have remained unchanged since 1880.   Lavallée was born Calixte Paquet dit Lavallée near Verchères , a village near present-day Montreal in the Province of Canada (now the Canadian province of Quebec ). He was a descendant of Isaac Pasquier, from Poitou, France, who arrived in Nouvelle-France in 1665 as a soldier in the Carignan-Salières regiment. Lavallée's father Augustin Lavallée , worked as a blacksmith, logger, bandmaster, self-taught luthier  and bandleader , and also worked for the pipe organ builder Joseph Casavant . Calixa Lavallée's mother was Charlotte-Caroline Valentine. Lavallée began his musical education with his father, who taught him organ by age 11. Lavallée also studied in Montréal with Paul Letondal and Charles Wugk Sabatier .  At age 13, Lavallée performed a piano concert at the Théâtre royal de Montréal. In 1857, he moved to the U.S. and lived in Rhode Island . After performing as a musician in a number of countries, including in Brazil and Mexico, he returned to the U.S., where he enlisted in the 4th Rhode Island Volunteers of the Union Army as a cornet player during the American Civil War . He attained the rank of lieutenant.  He was wounded in the Battle of Antietam . During and after the war, he traveled between Canada and the United States building his career in music. Lavallée returned to Montreal in 1863, and for two years performed concerts there.  In the 1860s he also resided briefly in Chicago, Philadelphia, and New York, but spent most of his time travelling with minstrel show companies. In 1867, he married an American woman, Josephine Gentilly (or "Gently"). Lavallée worked as a pianist, organist and music teacher, and also conducted orchestral and operatic productions in concert halls, including the Montréal Academy of Music in Montréal, Quebec City and in many U.S. cities. Among his pupils was composer Alexis Contant .  Lavallée returned to Montreal in the 1870s,  where he continued to perform and compose.  To celebrate St. Jean-Baptiste Day in 1880, the Lieutenant Governor of Québec, Théodore Robitaille , commissioned Lavallée to compose " O Canada " to a patriotic poem by Adolphe-Basile Routhier .  After some financial difficulties in Canada, Lavallée again moved to the United States.  In his later life he promoted the idea of union between Canada and the U.S.  During the later years of his life, Lavallée was the choirmaster at the Cathedral of the Holy Cross in Boston, and he died penniless in that city in 1891.  As the result of the campaign by the Montréal-based music director of the Victoria's Rifles, Joseph-Laurent Gariépy, his remains were returned to Montréal and reinterred at Côte-des-Neiges Cemetery in 1933.  The village of Calixa-Lavallée , southeast of Montreal, is named after him. The professional training school Calixa-Lavallée in Quebec also bears his name. The following roads were named to honour Calixa Lavallée: Notes References