Paul Le Flem (18 March 1881 – 31 July 1984) was a French composer and music critic . Born in Radon, Orne , and living most of his life in Lézardrieux , Le Flem studied at the Schola Cantorum under Vincent d'Indy and Albert Roussel , later teaching at the same establishment, where his pupils included Erik Satie and André Jolivet . His music is strongly influenced by his native Brittany , the landscape of which is reflected in most of his work. Before World War I , Le Flem produced several major works, including his First Symphony, a Fantasy for Piano and Orchestra, and an opera. The war temporarily put an end to his compositional activities, and in its aftermath he devoted himself to music criticism and choral conducting . He wrote numerous articles for the periodical Comoedia . In 1937, he began composing once again. Three additional symphonies and a second opera followed before he was finally forced to give up composition in 1976, at the age of 95, due to blindness. He died on 31 July 1984 at the age of 103. Some of his dramatic works include the operas Le Rossignol de St-Malo (The Nightingale of St Malo) and La Magicienne de la mer (The Magician of the Sea), as well as a version of the chante-fable Aucassin et Nicolette . For the Dead and the seven Pièces enfantines , both originally written in 1911, were orchestrated some years later. Two of the composer's children died young, and For the Dead is dedicated to their memory. In addition to his symphonies, Le Flem wrote evocative orchestral music such as En mer (At Sea) and La Voix du large (The Voice of the Open Sea). Le Flem also composed the music for Jean Tedesco 's short film The Great Gardener of France in 1942. Le Flem was a member of the Association des Compositeurs Breton ; another member, the Irish-American Swan Hennessy (1866–1929) dedicated his Petit trio celtique , Op. 52 (1921) to Le Flem. Paul Le Flem, with his wife, Jeanne (Even), was the grandfather of actress Marika Green and great-grandfather of actress Eva Green by his daughter, Jeanne, who married Swedish journalist Lennart Green.   