Harold Arlen (born Hyman Arluck ; February 15, 1905 – April 23, 1986) was an American composer of popular music who composed over 500 songs, a number of which have become known worldwide. In addition to composing the songs for the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz (lyrics by E.Y. Harburg ), including the classic " Over the Rainbow ", Arlen is a highly regarded contributor to the Great American Songbook . "Over the Rainbow" was voted the 20th century's No. 1 song by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA).   Arlen was born in Buffalo, New York , United States, the child of a cantor . His twin brother died the next day. He learned to play the piano as a youth, and formed a band as a young man. He achieved some local success as a pianist and singer before moving to New York City in his early twenties, where he worked as an accompanist in vaudeville  and changed his name to Harold Arlen. Between 1926 and about 1934, Arlen appeared occasionally as a band vocalist on records by The Buffalodians , Red Nichols , Joe Venuti , Leo Reisman , and Eddie Duchin , usually singing his own compositions. In 1929, Arlen composed his first well-known song: " Get Happy " (with lyrics by Ted Koehler ). Throughout the early and mid-1930s, Arlen and Koehler wrote shows for the Cotton Club , a popular Harlem night club, as well as for Broadway musicals and Hollywood films . Arlen and Koehler's partnership resulted in a number of hit songs, including the familiar standards " Let's Fall in Love " and " Stormy Weather ".  Arlen continued to perform as a pianist and vocalist with some success, most notably on records with Leo Reisman 's society dance orchestra. Arlen's compositions have always been popular with jazz musicians because of his facility at incorporating a blues feeling into the idiom of the  American popular song. In the mid-1930s, Arlen married, and spent increasing time in California, writing for movie musicals. It was at this time that he began working with lyricist E.Y. "Yip" Harburg . In 1938, the team was hired by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to compose songs for The Wizard of Oz , the most famous of which is " Over the Rainbow ", for which they won the Academy Award for Best Music, Original Song . They also wrote " Down with Love " (featured in the 1937 Broadway show Hooray for What! ), " Lydia the Tattooed Lady ", for Groucho Marx in At the Circus in 1939, and " Happiness is a Thing Called Joe ", for Ethel Waters in the 1943 movie Cabin in the Sky . Arlen was a longtime friend and onetime roommate of actor Ray Bolger , who starred in The Wizard of Oz . In the 1940s, he teamed up with lyricist Johnny Mercer , and continued to write hit songs like " Blues in the Night ", " Out of this World ", " That Old Black Magic ", " Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive ", " Any Place I Hang My Hat Is Home ", " Come Rain or Come Shine " and " One for My Baby (and One More for the Road) ". Arlen composed two defining tunes which bookend Judy Garland 's musical persona: as a yearning, innocent girl in "Over the Rainbow" and a world-weary, "chic chanteuse" with " The Man That Got Away ", the last written for the 1954 version of the film A Star Is Born . Arlen died of cancer at his Manhattan apartment at the age of eighty-one.  