Toshiro Mayuzumi ( 黛 敏郎 Mayuzumi Toshirō [majɯzɯmi toɕiɾoː] ; 20 February 1929, in Yokohama – 10 April 1997, in Kawasaki ) was a Japanese composer known for his implementation of avant-garde instrumentation alongside traditional Japanese musical techniques. His works drew inspiration from a variety of sources ranging from jazz to Balinese music , and he was considered a pioneer in the realm of musique concrète and electronic music ( Editors of the Encyclopedia Britannica n.d. ; Kozinn 1997 ), being the first artist in his country to explore these techniques ( Layne n.d. ). In the span of his career, his works included symphonies , ballets , operas , and film scores ( Kennedy and Kennedy 2007 ), and was the recipient of an Otaka prize by the NHK Symphony Orchestra and the Purple Medal of Merit ( Kirkup 1997 ). Mayuzumi was a student of Tomojirō Ikenouchi and Akira Ifukube at the Tokyo National University of Fine Arts and Music immediately following the Second World War , graduating in 1951. He then went to Europe where he attended the Paris Conservatoire national supérieur de musique , studying with Aubin and becoming familiar with the new developments of Olivier Messiaen and Pierre Boulez , as well as with the techniques of musique concrète ( Kanazawa 2001 ). He was initially enthusiastic about avant-garde Western music, especially that of Varèse , but beginning in 1957 he turned to pan-Asianism for new sonorous material ( Herd 1989 , 133). A prolific composer for the cinema, he composed more than a hundred film scores between Waga ya wa tanoshi (It's Great to Be Young) in 1951 and Jo no mai in 1984. The best-known film with a score by Mayuzumi is probably The Bible: In the Beginning (1966), for which he was nominated for an Academy Award and a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score . He also wrote many pieces for wind band that have been recorded by the Tokyo Kosei Wind Orchestra . [ citation needed ] Mayuzumi was the recipient of a Suntory Music Award in 1996.