Morfydd Llwyn Owen (1 October 1891 – 7 September 1918) was a Welsh composer , pianist and mezzo-soprano . A prolific composer, as well as a member of influential intellectual circles, she died shortly before her 27th birthday. Owen was born in Treforest , Wales on 1 October 1891. Her parents were both amateur musicians who ran a drapery business.  She was a musical child, showing great talent at an early age and received piano lessons early on.  While in her teens she appeared as a soloist in a performance of the Grieg Piano Concerto .  At 16 she began to study piano and composition with Dr David Evans in Cardiff and published her first work in 1909, a hymn tune entitled "Morfydd.".  After two years of study with Evans, Owen won a scholarship to study at the University College in Cardiff and was formally admitted into the composition class.  Many of her works were performed in student recitals at Cardiff, and she graduated in 1912.  The same year, she was admitted to the Gorsedd of the Bards at the Wrexham National Eisteddfod under the name Morfydd Llwyn Owen, honouring the placename of her father’s home by adopting 'Llwyn' as her middle name.  Owen then moved to London to study composition under Frederick Corder at the Royal Academy of Music on the Goring Thomas scholarship, which she held for four years.  It was at the Academy that Owen also began to study voice.  She was a very successful student and won two prizes (including the Charles Lucas medal for composition and the Oliveria Prescott prize for general excellence) within her first year.  She continued to accumulate awards during her stay at the Royal Academy where her work - songs, part-songs and piano pieces including a sonata, pieces for violin and piano, trio for violin, cello and piano - were performed. At the end of her course, she was honoured with the Academy's diploma, the ARAM.  While she was in London , Owen formed two separate circles of friends.  The first of these centred on the Charing Cross Welsh Presbyterian Chapel, which was a central gathering point for many Welsh people living in London.  Owen developed an especially close friendship with the wife of the then Liberal MP for Flintshire, Sir John Herbert Lewis . Lady Ruth Herbert Lewis was an important figure in the Welsh Folk-Song Society of London and invited Owen to become involved with the organization.  Owen obliged and transcribed, as well as wrote accompaniments to, many pieces for collections of Welsh Folk Songs. She provided musical examples to illustrate Lewis’s lectures on folksong and in 1914 they collaborated in publishing Folk-Songs Collected in Flintshire and the Vale of Clwyd .  The other social circle Owen associated with was the London literary intelligentsia; notable acquaintances were the poets D. H. Lawrence and Ezra Pound .  She also was friends with several Russian émigrés.  It was through her Russian friendships, as well as influence of her work with Ruth Lewis, that Owen developed a fascination with Russian folk song.  In 1915 she asked for, and received, a fellowship from the University of Wales to study the folk music of Russia , Norway and Finland .  However, the First World War made overseas travel impossible. Having developed her voice as a mezzo-soprano, in 1913 she sang four of her own songs: Chanson de Fortunio ; Song from a Persian Village , Suo Gân and The Year's at the Spring in a concert at London's Bechstein Hall .  The same year she had her Nocturne in D flat major performed at the Queen's Hall and at a regional Eisteddfod held in Swansea, she won the first prize for singing. Her professional debut as a singer was in January 1917 at the Aeolian Hall in London. In July 1917 she premiered a performance of Harry Farjeon ’s song cycle A Lute of Jade at the Birkenhead National Eisteddfod.  Later in the year, at the Henry Wood Promenade Concerts , her setting of the song For Jeanne's Sake was performed. She was made an associate professor at the Royal Academy of Music in 1918.  Though Owen only composed seriously for just over 10 years, she left a legacy of some 250 scores.  These include pieces for chamber ensemble, piano, mixed choir and tone poems for orchestra.  However, it is her compositions for voice and piano that are regarded as her most important and mature contributions. Her most well known include Slumber Song of the Madonna , To our Lady of Sorrows , Suo Gân , and her masterpiece in Welsh, Gweddi y Pechadur .  There were also some 22 hymn tunes and several anthems .  Towards the end of 1916 Owen was introduced to the London Welsh psychoanalyst Ernest Jones and after a brief courtship they married at Marylebone Register Office on 6 February 1917. This came as shock to her family and friends, few of whom were aware the ceremony was taking place. As the leading exponent in Britain of Freud 's ideas Jones was a highly controversial figure who viewed with disdain the "simple-minded" religious beliefs which he anticipated his wife would gradually relinquish. In response to the evident tensions in the marriage around this issue, Jones agreed to a marriage ceremony at the Charing Cross Welsh Presbyterian Chapel, which took place the following September with Owen's family and friends present. There were also tensions in the marriage around the role Jones expected his wife to take in supporting his busy professional and social life, inevitably at the expense of her career as a musician and output as a composer.  In the summer of 1918 the couple were holidaying in South Wales, staying at the home of Jones’s father near Swansea, when Owen developed an acute appendicitis. Jones hoped his brother-in-law, the eminent surgeon Wilfred Trotter , would be able to travel to Swansea in time to operate but Trotter advised urgent surgical intervention was needed and the operation was conducted by a local surgeon at the family home.  In his autobiography Jones gives an account of the days leading to her death on 7 September: “after a few days [she] became delirious with a high temperature. We thought there was blood poisoning till I got Trotter from London. He at once recognized delayed chloroform poisoning.  It had recently been discovered which neither the local doctor nor I had known, that this is a likelihood with a patient who is young, has suppuration in any part of the body, and has been deprived of sugar (as war conditions had then imposed);  in such circumstances only ether is permissible as an anesthetic. This simple piece of ignorance cost a valuable and promising life.  We fought hard, and there were moments when we seemed to have succeeded, but it was too late.”  On the basis of Jones’s reference to “the best personal news” in his correspondence with Freud, Jones’s biographer, Brenda Maddox , suggests that the reason that there was no subsequent autopsy was that Owen was pregnant and to have revealed this to her father and friends would have caused them further distress.  Owen was buried on 11 September in Oystermouth Cemetery , on the outskirts of Swansea, where her gravestone bears the inscription, chosen by Jones from Goethe's Faust : " Das Unbeschreibliche, hier ist's getan ".  In 1924 Jones arranged, with the assistance of Frederick Corder, the publication of a four-volume memorial edition of selections of her orchestral and instrumental work and of her compositions for voice and piano .  Thanking Jones for the copy he sent her, her close friend Elizabeth Lloyd wrote, "Each page brought fresh memories of our lost darling". Centenary editions of some of her songs and piano pieces were published in Cardiff in 1991. Song settings (with authors in brackets) unless otherwise stated:  Owen continues to be a revered figure of Welsh musical tradition, and many of her works have been recorded in compilations of Welsh songs and music.  These include: