George Perle (May 6, 1915 – January 23, 2009) was a composer and music theorist .  Perle was born in Bayonne , New Jersey .  He graduated from DePaul University , where he studied with Wesley LaViolette and received private lessons from Ernst Krenek . Later, he served as a technician fifth grade in the United States Army during World War II .   He earned his doctorate at New York University in 1956.  Perle composed with a technique of his own devising called "twelve-tone tonality". This technique was different from, but related to, the twelve-tone technique of the Second Viennese School ,  of which he was an "early admirer" and whose techniques he used aspects of but never fully adopted.  Perle's former student Paul Lansky described Perle's twelve-tone tonality thus: Basically this creates a hierarchy among the notes of the chromatic scale so that they are all referentially related to one or two pitches which then function as a tonic note or chord in tonality . The system similarly creates a hierarchy among intervals and finally, among larger collections of notes, 'chords.' The main debt of this system to the 12-tone system lies in its use of an ordered linear succession in the same way that a 12-tone set does".  In 1968, Perle cofounded the Alban Berg Society with Igor Stravinsky and Hans F. Redlich , who had the idea (according to Perle in his letter to Glen Flax of 4/1/89 [ citation needed ] ). Perle's important work on Berg includes documenting that the third act of Lulu , rather than being an unfinished sketch, was actually three-fifths complete and that the Lyric Suite contains a secret program dedicated to Berg's love-affair.  After retiring from Queens College in 1985, he became a professor emeritus at the Aaron Copland School of Music .  In 1986, Perle was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for Music for his Fourth Wind Quintet and also a MacArthur Fellowship .  In about 1989 Perle became composer-in-residence for the San Francisco Symphony, a three-year appointment. It was also around this time that he had published his fourth book entitled The Listening Composer . He died aged 93 in his home in New York City in January 2009.  He was subsequently buried in Calverton National Cemetery . On his headstone are inscribed the words " An die Musik ."  A growing number of younger artists have come to appreciate Perle as a composer ahead of his time. In the run-up to his 100th birthday celebrations the composer-pianist Michael Brown released a well received CD of a sampling of Perle's work for piano.  Perle was married to the sculptor Laura Slobe from 1940 to 1952; the couple were members of the Socialist Workers Party .  His second wife, Barbara Philips, died in 1978. Perle was survived at his death by his third wife, the former Shirley Gabis Rhoads, two daughters, and a stepdaughter.  Swift differentiates between Perle's 'free' or 'intuitive', tone-centered , and twelve-tone modal music.  He lists Perle's tone-centered compositions: