Goffredo Petrassi (16 July 1904 – 3 March 2003) was an Italian composer of modern classical music , conductor , and teacher. He is considered one of the most influential Italian composers of the twentieth century.  Petrassi was born at Zagarolo , near Rome . At the age of 15 he began to work at a music shop to supply his family's financial needs, and became fascinated by music. In 1928, he entered the Santa Cecilia Conservatory in Rome to study organ and composition . In 1934, composer Alfredo Casella conducted Petrassi's Partita for orchestra at the ISCM festival in Amsterdam . Later, Petrassi became musical director of the opera house La Fenice , and from 1959 taught composition at the Santa Cecilia Conservatory and at the Salzburg Mozarteum . Petrassi had many famous students, including Franco Donatoni , Aldo Clementi , Cornelius Cardew , Ennio Morricone , Karl Korte , Boris Porena , Norma Beecroft , Mario Bertoncini , Ernesto Rubin de Cervin , Eric Salzman , Kenneth Leighton , Peter Maxwell Davies , Michael Dellaira , Armando Santiago , and Richard Teitelbaum . See: List of music students by teacher: N to Q#Goffredo Petrassi . Petrassi died in Rome at the age of 98. Petrassi's early work was part of an attempt by several Italian composers to create a national  "Italian" revival in classical music, corresponding to the romantic work of Germans such as Richard Wagner . During this time, his work was characteristically neoclassical in style, influenced by Bartók , Hindemith and Stravinsky . In later years, Petrassi's open musical mind and acute personality led him to experiment with different post- Webernian influences and a wide range of poetic materials, from Latin hymns to Ariosto 's La follia d'Orlando and Cervantes ' Ritratto di Don Chisciotte . All these influences are present in a remarkable series of eight Concerti for Orchestra which he composed between the late 1930s and the late 1970s. Petrassi stopped composing in 1986 due to increasing loss of eyesight.