Thomas Baron Pitfield (5 April 1903 – 11 November 1999) was a British composer , poet , artist , engraver , calligrapher , craftsman , furniture builder and teacher . He was born in Bolton . Although he was essentially self-taught as a composer, he studied piano , cello and harmony at the Royal Manchester College of Music , where his teachers were Thomas Keighley, Frank Merrick and Carl Fuchs. Later he won a scholarship to study art and cabinet-making at the Bolton School of Art. After training as a teacher, he became art master at Tettenhall College, Wolverhampton .  Whilst there, as a pacifist , he joined the Peace Pledge Union . In the Second World War , he registered as a conscientious objector , with a condition that he continue teaching. He taught composition at the Royal Manchester College of Music from 1947 to 1973, where his  pupils included David Ellis, John Golland , John McCabe , John Ogdon and Ronald Stevenson . Between 1986 and 1993 he wrote a three volume autobiography . He continued to create art and music until his nineties. He died in Bowdon , Greater Manchester , in 1999. As a composer Pitfield was influenced by Ralph Vaughan Williams , Percy Grainger and Frederick Delius . He was a prolific composer and his compositions include collections of miniatures for students and amateurs, a five-movement Sinfonietta , a Trio for flute, oboe and piano, concertos for piano, violin, recorder and percussion, a Xylophone Sonata, an Oboe Sonata,  and solo works for accordion , clarsach, and harmonica . He also invented an instrument called “patterphone” to produce rain-like sounds. He wrote for many notable artists, such as Léon Goossens , Evelyn Rothwell , Archie Camden , Dolmetsch, and Osian Ellis . His music was published by more than 50 publishers. Hubert J. Foss of the Oxford University Press published many of his compositions, illustrations, frontispieces and cover-designs, which he made for various publications, including the one for Benjamin Britten 's Simple Symphony .