Philipp Jakob Riotte (16 August 1776 – 1856) was a German composer who lived primarily in Vienna . In the 1820s, his works were among the most-performed at the Theater an der Wien . He was a contemporary of Ludwig van Beethoven .  Very few of his works remain in the active repertoire today. Philipp Jakob Riotte was born at St. Wendel ( Saarland ).  He was probably descended from a French emigrant Huguenot family. The earliest records indicate he was expelled as choirboy in his hometown of Sankt Wendel . He studied violin , violoncello and later piano and organ . In 1793 he received his first employment as an organist at a seminar in Trier . In 1794 to 1805 he resided in Blieskastel , the residence of the Imperial counts of Leyen , as well as in Frankfurt am Main and Offenbach . In Offenbach, he continued his studies with the composer and music publisher Johann Anton André . From 1806 to 1808 Riotte was active as a Kapellmeister in Gdańsk and as a chief conductor in Magdeburg .
In 1808, Riotte established himself in Vienna . At first he made a living by giving piano lessons and selling his own compositions. In addition, he was active as a musical correspondent. Between 1810 and 1815, he contributed four "characteristic sound paintings" ( Charakteristische Tongemälde ), which helped establish his reputation. One of these "paintings" was the "battle of Leipzig or the liberation of Germany," a work that found some success across Germany. In addition, he wrote operas and oratorios , and piano reductions and variations of successful operas for the domestic parlour market. In 1818, Riotte became assistant Kapellmeister to the famous Theater an der Wien , shortly after its acquisition by a group of Viennese court nobles, including Ferdinand Palffy von Erdöd . The new owners decided to change the repertoire of the opera house, and Riotte wrote the music for the some of theatre's new spectacles, including children's ballets . In 1828, Riotte left the Theater an der Wien, shortly after its compelled sale in 1826. Through the 1830s, he composed extensively for the Theater in der Leopoldstadt . With more than 300 performances of his works, Riotte's exposure surpassed that of Ignaz von Seyfried and Mozart , although he remained well-behind the leading operatic composer of the day, Gioacchino Rossini .
Riotte died in Vienna in 1856 leaving no descendants. On account of his attachment with Sankt Wendel, he supported the town and left his estate to endow a local charitable institution.  Around 1823, he composed a variation on a waltz by Anton Diabelli , being one of the 50 composers who contributed to Vaterländischer Künstlerverein , an anthology that also included Ludwig van Beethoven 's Diabelli Variations . His compositions also include a symphony (No. 1 in C, Op. 25),  a clarinet concerto (Op. 28 in B-flat),  and a flute concerto (Op. 4 in G).  There is also a piano concerto in E-flat, Op. 8,  and three string quartets, Op. 21. 