Salamone Rossi or Salomone Rossi ( Hebrew : סלומונה רוסי or שלמה מן האדומים ‎) ( Salamon, Schlomo; de' Rossi ) (ca. 1570 – 1630) was an Italian Jewish violinist and composer. He was a transitional figure between the late Italian Renaissance period and early Baroque . As a young man, Rossi acquired a reputation as a talented violinist. He was then hired (in 1587) as a court musician in Mantua , where records of his activities as a violinist survive. Rossi served at the court of Mantua from 1587 to 1628 as concertmaster  where he entertained the ducal family and their highly esteemed guests. The composers Rossi, Monteverdi , Gastoldi , Wert and Viadana provided fashionable music for banquets, wedding feasts, theatre productions and chapel services amongst others. Rossi was so well-thought of at this court that he was excused from wearing the yellow badge that was required of other Jews in Mantua. Rossi probably died either in the invasion of Austrian troops, who defeated the Gonzagas and destroyed the Jewish ghetto in Mantua , or in the subsequent plague which ravaged the area. Rossi's sister, Madama Europa , was an opera singer, and possibly the first Jewish woman to be professionally engaged in that area.  Like her brother, she was employed at the court in Mantua; she is thought to have performed in the intermedio Il Ratto di Europa, by Gabriello Chiabrera and Gastoldi, during the wedding festivities for Francesco Gonzaga in 1608.  She also disappeared after the end of the Gonzaga court and subsequent sack of the ghetto. His first published work (released in 1589) was a collection of 19 canzonettes , short, dance-like compositions for a trio of voices with lighthearted, amorous lyrics. Rossi also flourished in his composition of more serious madrigals , combining the poetry of the greatest poets of the day (e.g. Guarini , Marino , Rinaldi , and Celiano ) with his melodies. In 1600, in the first two of his five madrigal books, Rossi published the earliest continuo madrigals, an innovation which partially defined the beginning of the Baroque era in music; these particular compositions included tablature for chitarrone .  Rossi published 150 secular works in Italian, including: Canzonette a 3, Libro primo Madrigali a 5, Libro primo In the field of instrumental music Rossi was a bold innovator. He was one of the first composers to apply to instrumental music the principles of monodic song, in which one melody dominates over secondary accompanying parts. His trio sonatas , among the first in the literature, provided for the development of an idiomatic and virtuoso violin technique. They stand midway between the homogeneous textures of the instrumental canzona of the late Renaissance and the trio sonata of the mature Baroque. Works published, and preserved today include: Rossi also published a collection of Jewish liturgical music, השירים אשר לשלמה (Ha-shirim asher li-Shlomo, The Songs of Solomon) in 1623. This was written in the Baroque tradition and (almost) entirely unconnected to traditional Jewish cantorial music. This was an unprecedented development in synagogal music. The biblical Song of Solomon does not appear within The Songs of Solomon , hence the name is probably a pun on Rossi's first name (Rikko 1969). Rossi set many Biblical Hebrew texts to music in their original Hebrew language, which makes him unique among Baroque composers. His vocal music resembles that of Claudio Monteverdi and Luigi Rossi, but its lyrics are in Hebrew. on collections