Virgil Thomson (November 25, 1896 – September 30, 1989) was an American composer and critic . He was instrumental in the development of the "American Sound" in classical music. He has been described as a modernist ,      a neoromantic ,  a neoclassicist ,  and a composer of "an Olympian blend of humanity and detachment"  whose "expressive voice was always carefully muted" until his late opera Lord Byron which, in contrast to all his previous work, exhibited an emotional content that rises to "moments of real passion".  Thomson was born in Kansas City, Missouri . As a child, he befriended Alice Smith, great-granddaughter of Joseph Smith , founder of the Latter-day Saint movement . During his youth, he often played the organ in Grace Church, (now Grace and Holy Trinity Cathedral), as his piano teacher was the church's organist.  After World War I, he entered Harvard University thanks to a loan from Dr. Fred M. Smith , the president of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints , and father of Alice Smith. His tours of Europe with the Harvard Glee Club helped nurture his desire to return there. At Harvard, Thomson focused his studies on the piano work of Erik Satie . He studied in Paris on fellowship for a year, and after graduating, lived in Paris from 1925 until 1940. He eventually studied with Nadia Boulanger and became a fixture of "Paris in the twenties." In 1925, in Paris, he cemented a relationship with painter Maurice Grosser (1903–1986), who was to become his life partner and frequent collaborator. Later he and Grosser lived at the Hotel Chelsea, where he presided over a largely gay salon that attracted many of the leading figures in music and art and theater, including Leonard Bernstein , Tennessee Williams , and many others. He also encouraged many younger composers and literary figures such as Ned Rorem , Lou Harrison , John Cage , Frank O'Hara , and Paul Bowles . Grosser died in 1986, three years before Thomson.  His most important friend from this period was Gertrude Stein , who was an artistic collaborator and mentor to him. Following the publication of his book, The State of Music , he established himself in New York City as a peer of Aaron Copland , and was also a music critic for the New York Herald-Tribune from 1940 to 1954.  His definition of music was famously "that which musicians do,"  and his views on music are radical in their insistence on reducing the rarefied aesthetics of music to market activity. He even went so far as to claim that the style a piece was written in could be most effectively understood as a consequence of its income source.  In 1969, Thompson composed Metropolitan Museum Fanfare: Portrait Of An American Artist to accompany the Museum's Centennial exhibition "New York Painting And Sculpture: 1940–1970."   Thomson became a sort of mentor and father figure to a new generation of American tonal composers such as Ned Rorem , Paul Bowles and Leonard Bernstein , a circle united as much by their shared homosexuality as by their similar compositional sensibilities.  Women composers were not part of that circle, and one writer has suggested that, as a critic, he selectively omitted mention of their works, or adopted a more passive tone when praising them.  Thomson was a recipient of Yale University 's Sanford Medal .  In 1988, he was awarded the National Medal of Arts .  He was a National Patron of Delta Omicron , an international professional music fraternity.  Thomson died on September 30, 1989, in his suite at the Hotel Chelsea in Manhattan, aged 92.  He had lived at the Chelsea for close to 50 years. 