John Holland Thow (October 6, 1949- March 4, 2007) was an American music composer . Thow produced an extensive and diverse body of work comprising solo, chamber, vocal, choral, operatic and orchestral repertoire. Born in Los Angeles in 1949, Thow grew up in Ventura, California .  As a child he studied flute and piano , and later studied composition with Adolph Weiss , a pupil of Schoenberg 's, and conductor Frank Salazar . At University of Southern California he pursued his Bachelor of Music , studying composition with Ingolf Dahl .  He continued his studies at Harvard with Earl Kim and Leon Kirchner , where he received his Ph.D. in composition in 1977. Thow received a Fulbright Fellowship , which allowed him to travel to Rome for the first time in 1973 to study composition with Luciano Berio , who would become an important mentor and influence. Thow later returned to Italy as a recipient of the prestigious Rome Prize . During that time he also studied with Luigi Dallapiccola and Franco Donatoni . After teaching at Boston University , Thow joined the University of California, Berkeley faculty in 1981, specializing in composition, orchestration , counterpoint , theory, in addition to teaching courses on American and European music of the 20th century. Some of his composition students include Keeril Makan , Dwight Banks , Richard Dudas , Yiorgos Vassilandonakis , Hubert Ho , and Dmitri Tymoczko . A master of orchestration with a passion for literature and indigenous musical traditions, Thow produced a series of works featuring unusual instrumental combinations and vivid texts.  His " Chumash Songs " for clarinet, violin, percussion and piano (2000), commissioned by the Ventura Chamber Music Festival, incorporated melodic and rhythmic elements of the Southern California Chumash Indian tribe.  " Musica d'amore " is a trio for oboe d'amore, viola d'amore and harp; " Summer Solstice " (2005) sets contemporary Greek poetry.  " Three Echoes " (2001), was written for the five-hole Lakota Sioux flute; " Three Pieces for Carillon ," was performed at the International Carillon Festival at UC Berkeley's Campanile, and " Six Duets " for baroque flutes (2006) was premiered in London . Thow received commissions from the San Francisco Symphony , Berkeley Opera , San Francisco Contemporary Music Players , Boston Musica Viva , Alea III , Earplay Ensemble , Ventura Chamber Music Festival and Detroit Chamber Winds , among others.  His compositions were performed at the Tanglewood and Edinburgh festivals , and by the L'Orchestra della RAI in Rome, Speculum Musicae and the Brooklyn Philharmonic .  His lyrical and richly colored music has been consistently championed by the finest contemporary performers. Thow's relationship with the San Francisco Symphony began with a 1986 performance of his " Resonance ."  The Symphony subsequently commissioned the three-movement " Into the Twilight " from Thow in 1988, and " Bellini Sky ," a concerto for English horn inspired by the paintings of the 15th-century artist Giovanni Bellini ,  in 2005.  His late work for soprano and orchestra titled " Eros and Dust " (2003), based on texts by Matthew Arnold , Edwin Arlington Robinson , W. H. Auden and Rumi , was influenced by the September 11, 2001 attacks on Manhattan . Thow received grants from the American Academy of Arts and Letters , the National Endowment for the Arts and the American Music Center , a Guggenheim Fellowship and the Rome Prize.  He was artist-in-residence at the Yaddo, Djerassi, Temecula Arts, and Wurlitzer Foundations .