Federico Moreno Torroba (3 March 1891 – 12 September 1982) was a Spanish composer , conductor, and theatrical impresario . He is especially remembered for his important contributions to the classical guitar repertoire, becoming one of the leading twentieth-century composers for the instrument.  He was also one of the foremost composers of zarzuelas , a form of Spanish light opera . His 1932 zarzuela, Luisa Fernanda , has proved to be enduringly popular. In addition, he composed ballets , symphonic works, and piano pieces, as well as one-act operas and one full-length opera, El poeta , which premiere in 1980, starring well-known tenor Plácido Domingo . Moreno Torroba also ran his own zarzuela company, which toured extensively, especially in Latin America . Over the course of his long career, Moreno Torroba composed many works, both in traditional Spanish forms and for the concert hall. He is often associated with the zarzuela , a traditional Spanish musical form. He achieved his greatest success in the 1930s with the zarzuelas Luisa Fernanda (1932) and La Chulapona (1934). Directing several opera companies, Moreno Torroba helped introduce the zarzuela to international audiences. In 1946 he formed a zarzuela company with singers Plácido Domingo Ferrer and Pepita Embil , the parents of Plácido Domingo and close friends of his. The company toured Latin America for two years, becoming particularly popular in Mexico . The composer who was identified from the beginning with the phalanx, to be on the national side. decided to go to America in 1946 to avoid the economic and food shortages of the postwar Spain. Moreno Torroba also composed operas, of which La Virgen de Mayo (1925) and El poeta (1980) with Plácido Domingo in the title role, are his best known.  In addition to his vocal works, he is well known for his compositions for the classical guitar ,  many of which were dedicated to either Maria Angélica Funes or Andrés Segovia . He also frequently conducted. (see below for works with guitar) Solo Guitar with orchestra Guitar quartets