Julia Tsenova (also spelled Julia Tzenova , Julia Cenova , or Julia Zenova , Bulgarian : Юлия Ценова ) ( ( 1948-07-30 ) July 30, 1948 – ( 2010-04-11 ) April 11, 2010), born in Sofia , Bulgaria , was an award-winning Bulgarian composer , pianist and musical pedagogue .  Julia Tsenova graduated both Composition and Piano in the State Academy of Music in Sofia as a student of Prof. Pancho Vladigerov . Tsenova took part in the International Composers' class in Sofia and Amsterdam , directed by Prof. Ton de Leeuw - the Netherlands (1981, 1982). She attended many workshops in Europe. Her music was performed in different contemporary festivals, as well as at the International Composers' Rostrum in Paris (1995). Since 1997 she was Professor of Piano and Dean at the Pop and Jazz Music Faculty in the State Academy of Music. She was a member of the Union of the Bulgarian Composers as well as of the International Society for Contemporary Music , and a President of the Bulgarian section. Julia Tsenova died on 11 April 2010. Her daughter Kristina Sandulova is also a concert pianist. Julia Tsenova has had versatile musical interests. She wrote in the field of symphonic, chamber, choral and scenic music. Her works are dramatic and rich in dynamics and philosophy. As a composer she owns a bright individual style and perfect use of the modern composition techniques. Tsenova has always had a strong interest in the ancient eastern philosophies - this interest finds its own secret ways to penetrate in the creative ideas of the composer. Traces of this trend can be found in her latest works as well. Her compositions have been performed in different musical forums in Bulgaria , Austria, Switzerland, England, Ireland, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Netherlands , Norway, Poland , Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary, Romania , Greece, Russia, India, Australia, United States, Canada and other countries.  In 2002 Bulgarian National Television produced a documentary entitled Prayers onto the Wall devoted to Julia Tsenova and her works. She died of cancer on April 11, 2010, in Sofia, and is buried in Central Sofia Cemetery.