Georges Samuel Tzipine (22 June 1907 – 8 December 1987)  was a French violinist , conductor and composer .  He was of Russian -Jewish origin.  He was trained as a violinist at the National Conservatory of Music in Paris, winning a first prize in 1926,  but moved to conducting in 1931 after support from Reynaldo Hahn .  He conducted the Paris Conservatoire Orchestra and worked for French Radiodiffusion, then for the Ballets Russes and Roland Petit ’s ballet. From the mid-1920s he was musical director of Gaumont Newsreel, for which he composed a great deal of varied background music to suit all kinds of documentary moods and themes.  His film scores included: Le Rat des villes et le Rat des champs (1926), Coq en pâte (1951), and Les Amoureux de Marianne (1954). He was particularly associated with the works of his long-time friend Arthur Honegger , and he conducted the premiere recordings of some of them ( Cris du Monde oratorio, Nicolas de Flüe ). He also conducted the first recordings of works by Florent Schmitt ( Psalm 47 , with Denise Duval ),  Jean Rivier (symphonies Nos. 3 and 5, for which he received a Grand Prix du Disque  ), Albert Roussel , Georges Auric , Darius Milhaud , and Francis Poulenc .  He conducted the premiere performances of Jacques Ibert ’s Le Chevalier Errant (1951) with the ORTF ,  René Challan ’s 2nd Symphony in F major (1 February 1959, Concerts Colonne ), recorded his Concerto Pastoral, Op. 20 (with Samson François , January 1954) and premiered his Piano Concerto (3 March 1957, with François), led the first performance of Ruth Gipps ’ Horn Concerto (1968), with the BBC Welsh Orchestra,  and the first recording of Alejandro García Caturla ’s Premiere Suite Cubaine .  His work was rarely available on CD until the release of EMI’s "Les Rarissimes" series.  Other composers whose works he conducted were Henry Barraud , Jean-Michel Damase , Johann-Christoph Voge , Georges Bizet , Frédéric Chopin and Franz Liszt (piano concertos with Samson François), Jean Françaix , Charles Gounod , Modest Mussorgsky , Giacomo Puccini , Henri Sauguet and Maurice Thiriet .  He conducted all the principal French orchestras, as well as the Hallé , the BBC Philharmonic , the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic , and the Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra .  From 1960 to 1965 he was the Chief Conductor of the Victorian Symphony Orchestra in Melbourne , Australia . He was appointed a Chevalier of the Légion d'honneur .  He died in 1987.