Guillermo Uribe Holguín (sometimes spelled Uribe-Holguín ) (17 March 1880 – 26 June 1971) was a Colombian composer and violinist and one of the most important Colombian cultural figures of his generation.   He composed prolifically in many genres and founded the National Symphony Orchestra of Colombia (previously the orchestra of the National Conservatory). Uribe Holguín was born in Bogotá .  His father was Guillermo Uribe and his mother Mercédes Holguín.  While studying at the School of Engineering, he simultaneously studied violin with Ricardo Figueroa, and composition with Santos Cifuentes and Augusto Azzali, at the National Academy of Music.  He became dissatisfied with his progress, and sought out a private teacher, Narciso Garay .  He completed his engineering studies.  In 1903 he visited New York City and for the first time he heard professional orchestras and opera.  It was there that he started his series of 300 trozos , based on folk melodies, written for various instruments.  In 1905 he was appointed professor of violin and harmony at the Academia.  There, in December 1905, he conducted his Victimae Paschali for solo voice, chorus and orchestra. He obtained a scholarship from the Colombian government to study in Paris.  In 1907, at the Schola Cantorum , he commenced violin studies with Armand Parent , and composition with Vincent d'Indy , alongside fellow students Erik Satie and Joaquín Turina .  He later took violin lessons in Brussels with César Thomson and Émile Chaumont .  In 1909, his Violin Sonata No. 1 was played at a concert of the Société Nationale de Musique in Paris, by Gabriel Vuillaume and Ricardo Viñes .  As a result of his Parisian studies, there is a marked French influence in the works he wrote prior to 1930.  In Paris, he met the pianist Lucía Gutiérrez .  They married in 1910, and she was often soloist in his works.  She died in 1925. In 1910 he returned to Colombia and became Director of the newly reorganized National Conservatory of  Music in Bogotá.  In 1932 the French government appointed him a Chevalier of the Légion d'honneur .  He resigned from the Conservatory in 1935 in order to dedicate himself to composition.  In 1939 he was decorated with the "Medalla Cívica del General Santander".  In 1941 he produced an autobiography.  He was reappointed director in 1942, a position he held until 1947. His final composition was Doce canciones , Op. 120, written in 1962. He died in Bogotá in 1971. Since 2005 there has been a revival of his music by Colombian guitarist Nilko Andreas Guarin, who has been editing and promoting Uribe's works worldwide. Guarin performed the premiere in New York of Pequena Suite , Op. 80, No. 1, written for Andrés Segovia but never played by him. He is working on a recording of never-performed music by Uribe-Holguín  including: Violin Sonata, Piano Trio, one string quartet, songs, and guitar music. 