Jaromír Weinberger ( Prague , 8 January 1896 – August 8, 1967) was a Czech born, naturalized American composer . Weinberger was born in Austria-Hungary , from a family of Jewish origin. He heard Czech folksongs from time spent at his grandparents' farm as a youth.  He started playing the piano aged 5, and composing and conducting aged 10. He began musical studies with Jaroslav Křička , and later teachers included Václav Talich and Rudolf Karel .  He became a student at the Prague Conservatory at age 14, as a second-year student, where he studied composition with Vítězslav Novák and Karel Hoffmeister .  Later, at Leipzig , he studied with Max Reger , who influenced Weinberger on the use of counterpoint .  In September 1922, Weinberger moved to the United States where he took up a position as an instructor at Cornell University .  Between 1922 and 1926 he was professor of composition at the Ithaca Conservatory (now the music school of Ithaca College ), New York. When he returned to Czechoslovakia he was appointed director of the National Theater in Bratislava , and later received appointments in Eger , Hungary, and Prague. In 1926 Weinberger completed Schwanda the Bagpiper ( Švanda Dudák ), which became highly successful, with thousands of performances in hundreds of theatres including the Metropolitan Opera in New York City.  His operetta Frühlingsstürme was first performed at the Theatre in Admiralspalast in Berlin on January 19, 1933 with Jarmila Novotná and Richard Tauber in the leading roles. Mary Losseff took over from Novotná in February, but the show was closed down by the Nazi government in March. His subsequent European works include the Passacaglia for orchestra and organ, Six Bohemian Dances for violin and piano, the opera The Outcasts of Poker Flat and a grand oratorio Christmas , though none of them matched the success of Schwanda the Bagpiper .  In 1939, after extensive travels to the United States , Bratislava and Vienna , he left Czechoslovakia to escape the Nazis and settled in New York state, teaching there and in Ohio . He wrote a number of works on commission from American orchestras. He became an American citizen in 1948. During the 1950s, Weinberger moved to St. Petersburg, Florida . In later life, he developed cancer of the brain . This, together with money worries and the neglect of his music, prompted him to take a lethal sedative overdose in August 1967.  His wife, Jane Lemberger Weinberger (also known as Hansi), died on July 31, 1968. In 2004 Czech pianist Tomáš Víšek and cellist František Brikcius organized a tour celebrating Weinberger's work. Weinberger composed over 100 works, including operas, operettas, choral works, and works for orchestra.  However, the only one which is still performed is the opera Schwanda the Bagpiper ( Švanda dudák ), a worldwide success after its première in 1927.  The opera is still performed occasionally, and the Polka and Fugue from it is often heard in a concert version. The artists of the Walt Disney studio considered making it into a segment for Fantasia 2000 , but instead chose Shostakovich's Piano Concerto No. 2 in F major , in the form of Hans Christian Andersen 's " The Steadfast Tin Soldier ". Weinberger used a varied musical language.  His studies in Prague and Leipzig stressed formal control and contrapuntal mastery; following the example of his teachers, Křička, Novák and Reger, Weinberger's works exhibit control, but are also playful.  This combination received both praise and criticism. 