Samuel Sebastian Wesley (14 August 1810 – 19 April 1876) was an English organist and composer. Wesley married Mary Anne Merewether and had 6 children.  Born in London, he was the eldest child in the composer Samuel Wesley 's second family, which he formed with Sarah Suter having separated from his wife Charlotte.  Samuel Sebastian was the grandson of Charles Wesley . His middle name derived from his father's lifelong admiration for the music of Bach . After singing in the choir of the Chapel Royal as a boy, Samuel Sebastian embarked on a career as a musician, and was appointed organist at Hereford Cathedral in 1832.  While there he married the sister of the Dean, John Merryweather.  He moved to Exeter Cathedral three years later, and subsequently held appointments at Leeds Parish Church (from 1842), Winchester Cathedral (from 1849) and Gloucester Cathedral (1865-1876).  In 1839 he received both his Bachelor of Music degree and a Doctorate of Music degree from Oxford. He became a Professor of Organ at the Royal Academy of Music in 1850. He died at his home in Gloucester on 19 April 1876 aged 65. He is buried next to his daughter in St. Bartholomew's Cemetery in Exeter by the old City Wall.  There are memorial tablets to him in Exeter Cathedral and Winchester Cathedral , and his memorial at Gloucester Cathedral is in stained glass. Famous in his lifetime as one of his country's leading organists and choirmasters, he composed almost exclusively for the Church of England , which continues to cherish his memory.  His better-known anthems include Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace and Wash me throughly . He also wrote several rather late examples of verse anthems , which contrast unison and contrapuntal sections with smaller, more intimate passages for solo voice or voices. Blessed be the God and Father , The Wilderness and Ascribe unto the Lord are of considerable length, as is his Service in E. The popular short anthem Lead me, Lord is an extract from Praise the Lord, O my soul . Several of his pieces for solo organ have enduring value and continue to be played in recitals now and then. Of his hymn tunes the best-known are "Aurelia" and "Hereford", but "Cornwall" and "Harewood" are also particularly fine. [ opinion ] "Aurelia" has been widely adopted in the United States, and is regularly heard there.  Usually now sung to the words "The Church's One Foundation", Wesley composed the tune for the hymn "Jerusalem the Golden", hence the name "Aurelia".  One notable feature of his career is his aversion to equal temperament , an aversion which he kept for decades after this tuning method had been accepted on the Continent and even in most of England. Such distaste did not stop him from substantial use of chromaticism in several of his published compositions. While at Winchester Cathedral Wesley was largely responsible for the Cathedral's acquisition in 1854 of the Father Willis organ which had been exhibited at The Great Exhibition , 1851.  The success of the Exhibition organ led directly to the award of the contract to Willis for a 100-stop organ for St George's Hall, Liverpool built in 1855.  Wesley was the consultant for this major and important project, but the organ was, arguably, impaired for some years by Wesley's insistence that it be tuned to unequal temperament.   Wesley, with Father Willis , can be credited with the invention of the concave and radiating organ pedalboard, but demurred when Willis proposed that it should be known as the "Wesley-Willis" pedalboard.   However, their joint conception has been largely adopted as an international standard for organs throughout the English-speaking world and those exported elsewhere.   Selected works include the following:   Other hymn tunes composed or arranged by Wesley are listed on the Library of Congress Linked Data Service. Celebrations in Leeds for the 200th anniversary of Wesley's birth began with Festal Evensong at Leeds Parish Church on Sunday 4 July 2010 followed by a gala choral recital. Worship on Sunday 15 August was broadcast on BBC Radio Four . Dr Lindley gave a commemorative recital of Wesley's organ music in the evening and a commemorative recital of music by Wesley at Leeds Town Hall on 13 September.