Paul Wranitzky , (Czech: Pavel Vranický , 30 December 1756 – 29 September 1808), was a Moravian -Austrian classical composer . His half brother, Antonín , was also a composer. Wranitzky was born in Neureisch ( Nová Říše ) in Habsburg Moravia .  He studied at the Faculty of Theology of University of Olomouc and later a theological seminary in Vienna. At age 20, like so many other Czech composers of that period, he moved to Vienna to seek out opportunities within the Austrian imperial capital. From 1790, he conducted both royal theatre orchestras. He was highly respected by Mozart , Haydn and Beethoven ; the latter two preferred him as conductor of their new works (e.g., Beethoven's First Symphony in 1800) [ citation needed ] . Wranitzky was a prolific composer. His output comprises ten operas , 44 symphonies , at least 56 string quartets (some sources give a number as high as 73) [ This quote needs a citation ] and a large amount of other orchestral and chamber music . His opera, Oberon – The Fairy King from 1789 was a favourite in this genre and inspired Emanuel Schikaneder to write the libretto of The Magic Flute for Mozart in 1791; in the mid-1790s, Goethe sought to collaborate with Wranitzky on a sequel to the Mozart opera. Wranitzky died in Vienna on 29 September 1808. Beethoven wrote Variations on a Russian Dance ([[WoO 71), based on a theme in Wranitzky's opera Das Waldmädchen ( The Forest Maiden ). Although some scholars believe that he studied with Haydn, there is no proof of this. But there can be no question that he studied and was influenced by Haydn's quartets. Like Haydn, Wranitzky's quartet writing went through many stages of development beginning with the pre-classical and evolving to the finished sonata form of late Viennese classicism. The majority of his quartets are in three movements; many share the qualities of the Parisian quatuor concertant , with virtuoso writing in all four parts. In these works, he explored the emerging Romantic style with (for the time) daring harmonic progressions, theatrical gestures and virtuoso display. Based on the ten Wranitzky quartets he has studied, music historian and Anton Reicha scholar Ron Drummond writes, "I can safely and with absolute confidence say that Wranitzky's achievement as a composer of string quartets is a greater achievement, overall, than Mozart's. Lest that statement be misunderstood, let me clarify: it's simply that Wranitzky's output dwarfs Mozart's, and the quality of each man's (mature) productions is so superb that Wranitzky wins by sheer numbers."  Writing about Wranitzky's music in the last part of the 19th century, the French critic and musicologist François-Joseph Fétis recalled, "The music of Wranitzky was in fashion when it was new because of his natural melodies and brilliant style. He treats the orchestra well, especially in symphonies. I recall that, in my youth, his works held up very well in comparison with those of Haydn. Their premature abandonment of today has been for me a source of astonishment." Operas Operettas Singspiele Other types of opera works Ballets Theatre music Concertos Other orchestra works