Jan Dismas Zelenka (baptised Jan Lukáš Zelenka 16 October 1679 – 23 December 1745),  also known as Johann Dismas Zelenka, sometimes Johannes Lucas Ignatius Dismas Zelenka, was a Czech composer and musician of the Baroque period . His music is admired for its harmonic inventiveness and counterpoint . Zelenka was born in Louňovice pod Blaníkem (German: Launiowitz ), a small market town southeast of Prague , in Bohemia . He was the eldest of eight children born to Marie Magdalena (by maiden name Hájek) and Jiří Zelenka. The middle name Dismas is probably his confirmation name.  Zelenka's father Jiří was a schoolmaster and organist in Launiowitz, and was likely his first music teacher. Nothing more is known with certainty about Zelenka's early years, but we know that he received his musical training at the Jesuit college Clementinum in Prague  and that his instrument was the violone (bass viol ). His first works were probably written in Prague. His earliest known work is the school drama Via laureta (ZWV 245), composed in 1704, from which only the libretto has been preserved and the music is lost. In 1709 in Prague, Zelenka served Baron von Johann Hubert von Hartig (in Czech Ludvík Josef z Hartigu ) before his appointment as a violone player in Dresden 's royal orchestra.  Baron von Hartig was a well-known connoisseur of music and a virtuoso musician. He corresponded with many important Italian composers, and amassed a great music library which Zelenka would later have access to, notably including Antonio Lotti 's Missa Sapientiae . ~ 1729 Zelenka copied this work from Hartig's collection, and later in the 1730s Johann Sebastian Bach acquired a copy of it from Zelenka's library. George Frideric Handel 's copy of the same Mass might also have been acquired through Zelenka. When Johann Hubert died in Prague in 1735 or possibly 1741, Zelenka dedicated his Litaniae Lauretanae 'Salus infirmorum' (ZWV 152) to his old patron. Baron von Hartig may have recommended Zelenka to the Dresden Hofkapelle (court orchestra) as a double bass player. In any event, he entered the service of the Dresden court with a salary of 300 thalers in 1710/11. The favorable conditions for music making there added impetus to his creativity, particularly with respect to the composition of sacred music for the Catholic court church.  His first major work in Dresden was a Mass , the "Missa Sanctae Caeciliae" (c. 1711).  Zelenka's music must have impressed the court, because only a few months after his arrival in Dresden his salary was increased to 350 thalers. This placed him among the most highly paid musicians in the Hofkapelle . Three years later, it was raised to 400 thalers. In 1716, Zelenka continued his education in Vienna under the Habsburg Imperial Kapellmeister Johann Joseph Fux . Whether he ever visited Venice is unclear, but a Saxon court document of 1715 records a royal cash advance for such a trip to Zelenka and his fellow composers Christian Petzold and Johann Georg Pisendel . New documents confirming the arrival of Petzold and Pisendel in Italy have now surfaced but it seems unlikely that Zelenka, not mentioned in any of them, went with them to Venice.  Back in Dresden in 1719 in any event, he remained there except for an extended stay in Prague in 1722-3, when he conducted the première at the time of the coronation of Charles VI of one of his major secular works, Sub olea pacis et palma virtutis conspicua orbi regia Bohemiae Corona , a melodrama about St. Wenceslas .  While in Prague, he concentrated on instrumental composition and produced the autograph of the score of Concerto à 8 Concertanti —"Six concerti written in a hurry in Prague in 1723" (ZWV 186, 187, 188, 189). In the early 1720s, Zelenka composed some of his finest works like the Responsoria pro hebdomada (ZWV 55) and the Lamentations (ZWV 53). His compositions still comprise an important part of the repertory of the Catholic court church. Following the frequent illnesses of Kapellmeister Johann David Heinichen , Zelenka gradually took over the direction of the sacred music. In January 1726, he began entering his own works and those of others he collected into a register called Inventarium (1726-39), one of the most important documents of Dresden baroque music. In July 1729, Heinichen died and Zelenka became acting Kapellmeister, a position he occupied in an unofficial capacity until 1734. This period is known as the Interregnum , a term coined by Professor Wolfgang Horn.  The first work that confirms Zelenka's new status is a Sinfonia (ZWV 190, 18 May 1729, previously known as Capriccio ), which, as Janice B. Stockigt has now established, was performed at a Gala to celebrate the birthday of the Saxon Elector and Polish king, Augustus II the Strong .  The official publication Königl. Polnischer und Churfürstl. Sächsischer Hoff- und Staats-Calender (Hof- from 1734), which listed the members and servants of the Dresden court, listed Zelenka as a Contra-Basso & Compositeur in the editions of 1731 and 1732; in 1733, he is listed as a Compositeur only, which suggests that he no longer was playing the double bass. Instead, he most likely directed the sacred music in his capacity as a singer.  The period of the Interregnum gave birth to a number of outlandish theories on Zelenka's position at the Dresden court, and especially around his petitions from October/November 1733 for the Kapellmeister position. The fact is that before the death of Heinichen in 1729, the Dresden court was already actively looking for a well-established opera composer to take Heinichen's place. This was a part of a long-term project to re-establish opera in Dresden. In 1724, the Dresden court began training five young Italian opera singers with some of the finest vocal teachers in Italy like Nicola Porpora , a great composer in his own right and future teacher of the young Joseph Haydn. In the first week of February 1730, the young singers, the castrato alto Domenico Annibali , the castrato sopranos Giovanni Bindi (also called Porporino ), Ventura Rocchetti 'Venturini' and the sister sopranos Maria Rosa Negri and Anna Negri were called to Dresden (they probably participated in Il Diamante de Zelenka in 1737). In the same week, Johann Adolf Hasse was offered the "primo" Kapellmeister position and became the first and most senior Kapellmeister .  Following the arrival of the five young singers in Dresden in April 1730, Zelenka played an important role in their continuing education. After the " compositeur de la musique italienne " Giovanni Alberto Ristori travelled to Moscow in the end of 1730, Zelenka became responsible for supplying secular vocal music for the court chamber concerts at the royal palace in Dresden. It is at this point in time when he began to assemble his fascinating collection of Italian opera and cantata scores, which partly still exists in Dresden and are individually numbered in Zelenka's own hand. This suggest that he wrote down a complete inventory of the secular works in his possession, and by referring to the numbers he assigned each work it was possible to reconstruct the now missing inventory. This included a number of arias of Hasse, who arrived in Dresden in July 1731 with his famous wife, Faustina Bordoni-Hasse , the most brilliant female singer of the Baroque era. Shortly after his arrival, Hasse was officially appointed Kapellmeister and, unrivalled and unchallenged, retained the position for the next 32 years. After the performances of his opera Cleofide in September 1731, Hasse and Faustina travelled back to Italy, but not before the future arrangements of the Hofkapelle had been decided and later put in motion. Pisendel, a brilliant violinist, was officially appointed Konzertmeister. Eleven new musicians were hired for the orchestra on 28 November of the same year. On that same day, Zelenka was awarded a handsome salary increase of 37.5 %, which brought his wages up to 550 thalers. This enabled him to purchase 24 opera arias, one duet, eight secular cantatas and two sacred motets in score from Antonio Vivaldi , music he was then able to use both in the chamber and the church.  After August II died in Warsaw on 1 February 1733, his son and successor as Saxon Elector Friedrich August moved swiftly and signed Hasse and Faustina to an extraordinary contract worth an astonishing 6,000 thalers annually, which also covered their travel expenses. At that time, Hasse was already one of the most famous composers in Europe and it was a major coup for the Dresden court to have secured his and Faustina's services. Confirmation of Hasse's position is seen in the libretto to his Siroe which was performed in Bologna in May 1733, where the composer was awarded the title of Maestro di Cappella di S.A. R. l’Elettore di Sassonia . In that same month, Zelenka was also referred to as the elector's "well-born and virtuoso Kapellmeister " in a letter written by the Superior of the Catholic court church in Dresden. Following the election of Friedrich August as August III, King of Poland in October 1733, countless servants from all departments of the Dresden court sent in petitions for unpaid salaries or promotions. Zelenka was one of those who petitioned. It was only natural for the composer to wish to attain official recognition from the newly elected Polish king. The impression has often been given in the literature that Zelenka was in direct competition with Hasse for the Kapellmeister position, but nothing is further from the truth. It was very clear to Zelenka at that time that his colleague Hasse was, and would remain, senior Kapellmeister.  As it turned out, Hasse requested in 1750 that he alone would hold this title. This led the Dresden court to create the official position of church composer, which Zelenka held from 1734 onwards, along with his student Tobias Buz and, from November 1736 on, of J. S. Bach. Bach held Zelenka in high esteem, as evidenced by a letter of 13 January 1775 from his great son C.P.E. Bach to the Bach biographer Johann Nikolaus Forkel . Zelenka was actually a guest in Bach's Leipzig home at one point. Bach was trusted enough by Zelenka for his eldest son Wilhelm Friedemann to copy out the Amen from Zelenka's third Magnificat (ZWV 108) to use in the Leipzig's St. Thomas' Church, where J. S. Bach was cantor for the last two and a half decades of his life.  In addition to composing, Zelenka taught throughout his life a number of prominent musicians of his time, like Johann Joachim Quantz ( Frederick the Great of Prussia's longtime court flautist and flute teacher) and J. G. Roellig. His close friends included eminent composers such as Georg Philipp Telemann , Johann Georg Pisendel and Sylvius Leopold Weiss . On 23 December 1745, Zelenka died of dropsy and was buried on Christmas Eve.  He never married and had no children, and his compositions and musical estate were purchased from his beneficiaries by the Electress of Saxony and the Queen of Poland Maria Josepha of Austria . After his death, these were considered valuable court possessions. Telemann , with Pisendel 's assistance, tried unsuccessfully to publish Zelenka's "Responsoria." On 17 April 1756, he wrote with undisguised contempt for publishers' disinterest in the work that "the complete manuscript will be at the Dresden court, kept under lock and key as something very rare." There is no confirmed portrait of Zelenka, but worthy of mention is a black-and-white mirror-image copy of a well-known portrait of his old teacher Fux which has been passed off as a picture of Zelenka on several respected websites. Zelenka's pieces are characterized by a very daring compositional structure with a highly spirited harmonic invention and complex counterpoint. His works are often virtuosic and difficult to perform, but always fresh and surprising, with sudden turns of harmony. In particular, his writing for bass instruments is far more demanding than that of other composers of his era. His instrumental works the trio sonatas , capricci , and concertos are exemplary models of his early style (1710s –1720s). The six trio sonatas demand high virtuosity and expressive sensitivity from performers. As Zelenka was himself a violone player, he was known to write fast-moving continuo parts with driving and complicated rhythm. Zelenka was aware of the music in different regions of Europe. He wrote complex fugues , ornate operatic arias , galant -style dances, baroque recitatives , Palestrina -like chorales , and virtuosic concertos. Zelenka's musical language is closest to Bach's, especially in its richness of contrapuntal harmonies and ingenious usage of fugal themes. Nevertheless, Zelenka's language is idiosyncratic in its unexpected harmonic twists, obsession with chromatic harmonies, huge usage of syncopated and tuplet figures, and unusually long phrases full of varied musical ideas. He is sometimes considered as Bach's Catholic counterpart, in his works.   Zelenka's music is influenced by the Czech folk music . In this respect, he continues the tradition of the production of specific Czech national music initiated by Adam Michna z Otradovic and brought to its culmination later in works by Bedřich Smetana and Antonín Dvořák in the nineteenth century and Leoš Janáček and Bohuslav Martinů in the twentieth century. In 2013, Damian Thompson wrote of Zelenka, "He belongs to a band of mavericks in musical history whose experiments with harmony seem to catapult them into another generation."  The rediscovery of Jan Dismas Zelenka's work is attributed to Bedřich Smetana , who rewrote some scores from the archives in Dresden and introduced one of the composer's orchestral suites in Prague's New Town Theatre festivals in 1863. It was mistakenly assumed that many of Zelenka's autograph scores were destroyed during the firebombing of Dresden in February 1945. However, the scores were not kept in the Katholische Hofkirche but in the basement of the Japanese Palace, north of the river Elbe . Some are certainly missing, but this probably happened gradually – and the lost scores represent only a small proportion of his extant works. Interest in Zelenka's music has begun to grow, especially since the end of the 1950s. By the late 1960s and early 1970s all Zelenka's instrumental compositions and selected liturgical music were published in Czechoslovakia . The most important revival was demonstrated by the first presentation of selected compositions by the Czech conductor Milan Munclinger and his ensemble Ars Rediviva . They were three trio sonatas in 1958–60, Sinfonia concertante in 1963 and the exquisite interpretation of "Lamentationes Jeremiae prophetae" with the soloists Karl Berman, Nedda Casei and Theo Altmeyer in 1969. The music of Zelenka has become widely known and available since that time through recordings and sparked the interest of other musicians such as Heinz Holliger and Reinhard Goebel . More than half of Zelenka's works have now been recorded, mostly in the Czech Republic and Germany . Such recordings include the masses Missa Purificationis , Missa Sanctissimae trinitatis , Missa votiva , Missa Sancti Josephi , and his secular works " Sub olea pacis " and " Il Diamante ", mostly performed by new Czech ensembles using original instruments and interpretational techniques of the Baroque era . The most popular are Musica Florea , Collegium 1704 , Ensemble Inégal , and Capella Regia Musicalis . In honor of Jan Dismas Zelenka, in 1984 " The Autumn Music Festival under Blaník " ( Podblanický hudební podzim in Czech) was founded and commemorated with the memorial plaque on his house. Since then, performances of Zelenka's music have regularly taken place in and around his birthplace. Zelenka's complete compositions are listed in the Wolfgang Reich 's thematic catalogue Jan Dismas Zelenka: Thematisch-systematisches Verzeichnis der musikalischen Werke (ZWV)  ("Systematic thematic catalogue of musical works"); in the Janice Stockigt 's monograph Jan Dismas Zelenka: A Bohemian Musician at the Court of Dresden  , and in the digitized database of the Petrucci Music Library . The total number of Zelenka's known and attributed opus-numbered works is 249. The sacred vocal-instrumental music is at the center of his compositions and include over 20 masses , four extensive oratorios and requiems , two Magnificats and Te Deum settings, 13 litanies , many psalms , hymns , and antiphons . Zelenka also wrote a number of purely instrumental works – six trio or quartet sonatas, five capricci, one "Hipocondrie" and other concertos , overtures and symphonies . The most appreciated of Zelenka's sacred works are probably his masses , above all his Missa Purificationis (ZWV 16, his last mass to include brass instruments) and his final five pieces (ZWV 17–21), commonly called "High Mass" compositions, written between 1736 and 1741 and considered as Zelenka's compositional peak. The last three were also called "Missae ultimae" (Last Masses). The list below contains only the most important sacred works, that have been sufficiently explored to date. Masses and requiems Oratorios Litanies Psalms and hymn settings Other liturgical and spiritual works Zelenka composed only a few extensive vocal-instrumental pieces on secular themes, but one of them – Sub olea pacis et palma virtutis -- Melodrama de St. Wenceslao (1723) – not only represents one of the high points in baroque music, but transcends it, as with many others of Zelenka's works. It is a monumental opus with aspects of melodrama , oratory and contemporary opera, composed for the coronation of Charles VI by the Czech king and celebrating the memory of the greatest Czech saint and patron of Bohemia, prince St. Wenceslaus (Václav), one of the founders of the Czech state. Vocal-instrumental works Instrumental works The Zelenka memorial in Louňovice pod Blaníkem includes the Zelenka's memorial plaque, made by Marie Uchytilová and installed in 1984, and a sundial to commemorate the 333rd anniversary of his birth in 2012. The graphic design and the painting of the sundial is performed by Milan Houdek; the text is written by Vladimír Hirsch and reads: "Tempus fugit — opus permanens est" (above; in English, "Time flies — compositions are permanent"), "Ad honorem artis tui, ad gloriam Dei et patriae petentis" (below; in English, "To honor your craft, to the glory of God, and the country heading"). Memorial Sundial Memorial with sundial