Barbara of Portugal (Maria Madalena Bárbara Xavier Leonor Teresa Antónia Josefa; 4 December 1711 – 27 August 1758) was an Infanta of Portugal , and a Queen of Spain by marriage to Ferdinand VI of Spain . Born Maria Madalena Josefa Teresa Bárbara, Barbara was the eldest child of King John V of Portugal and Archduchess Maria Anna of Austria , a daughter of Emperor Leopold I . She was baptised Maria Madalena Bárbara Xavier Leonor Teresa Antónia Josefa , her names honouring a number of saints and relatives. She was usually referred to as Bárbara or Maria Bárbara , a name never before used among Portuguese royalty but given in honour of Saint Barbara , the saint of her birthday. She was a first cousin of the future Empress Maria Theresa as well as Maria Josepha of Austria . Although her parents were married in 1708, they remained childless for nearly three years. The King then made a promise to God that if an heir to the throne was born, a great convent would be built as a sign of gratitude. On 4 December 1711 Barbara was born, and, as promised, the King had the Convent of Mafra built. Barbara was born heir-presumptive to the Portuguese throne, and styled Princess of Brazil . Her status as heir-presumptive came to an end two years later when her mother, the Queen, gave birth to a son, Pedro. Though Pedro died at the age of two, The Queen had already had born another boy, Joseph , and hence Barbara never became heir-presumptive again. As a girl her family intended that she be married to Louis XV of France . Barbara had a fine education and loved music. A prodigiously talented keyboard player, she was the sole pupil of Domenico Scarlatti , the great harpsichordist and composer , from age 9 or 10 until 1757, when Scarlatti died, a year before her own death. In 1729 at the age 18, Barbara married the future Ferdinand VI of Spain , two years her junior. Her brother Joseph married Ferdinand's half-sister, the Spanish Infanta Mariana Victoria , who had been rejected as a bride for Louis XV. The double marriage was meant to repair the Portuguese-Spanish alliance.  Scarlatti followed Barbara to Madrid after her marriage and remained with her, composing hundreds of harpsichord sonatas for her. During their time as Prince and Princess of the Asturias, Ferdinand and Barbara became the target of the opposition known as the Spanish party, in parallel with Spain's deteriorating relations with Portugal. From 1733 until 1737 they were kept more or less under house arrest in their apartments,  prevented from appearing in public and watched by the spies of Queen Elizabeth. This gave Barbara the time to deepen her relationship with Ferdinand, a timid person who suffered also from ill health.  Barbara was not considered beautiful by her contemporaries, and her homely looks were thought by observers to have caused her future husband a visible shock when he was first presented to her. However, 'Ferdinand the Learned' (as he was later known) became deeply attached to her,  sharing her passion for music [ citation needed ] and soon becoming  dependent on her for advice and support. When he ascended the Spanish throne as Ferdinand VI, the French ambassador noted "it is rather Barbara who succeeds Elizabeth [Ferdinand's step-mother] than Ferdinand succeeding Philippe."  Barbara was well-educated, and in addition to her musical talents was adept at languages and was an avid reader on many varied subjects.  Upon their succession, Barbara was exposed to attempts drive a political wedge between her and Ferdinand, engineered among others, supporters of the Queen Dowager, and she made an alliance with three members of the Spanish party, who had been in opposition during the previous regime, Ensenada , Huescar and Carvajal . She thus secured the "Spanish party" as her supporters and obtained the dismissal of all power holders of the previous regime who threatened her  influence over Ferdinand.  Encouraged by Barbara, Ferdinand fired the minister Villarias, who was replaced by Carvajal, and in July 1747 the Queen Dowager's was banished  from court.  During her husband's reign, Barbara was to preside over magnificent parties and concerts at her favorite retreat, the Royal Palace of Aranjuez . However, in contrast to her predecessor as queen, Barbara did not like to flaunt her influence over her spouse and the government policy, and she made a moderately positive impression upon the public.  She was not as self-assured, nor did she have as much political ambition as Elisabeth Farnese, and her policy focused mainly upon a friendly relationship between Spain and Portugal in cooperation with her father and the Portuguese ambassador Belmonte.  Queen Barbara participated regularly in the affairs of state: the ministers, who respected her, presented to her all documents of state before they were given to the king, because: "only she knows what ought either be said or hidden from the king":  she was the channel through which the ministers worked with the king, as it was she who advised them how to achieve the desired result from the king, and the ministers relied upon her for their work as, the British ambassador Benjamin Keene reported: "She can sway him as she pleases, with as much power, but much less difficulty, than ever the Dowager did with the late King, his father."  In 1754, she was behind the fall of her previous ally Ensenada. Keene and Huascar presented the Queen with a paper implying that minister Ensenada was making puppets of the royal couple. They succeeded in  convincing  her to act against Ensenada, and in cooperation with Richard Wall and Huascar, Barbara convinced Ferdinand to exile Ensenada.  The couple produced no children who survived,  with Barbara having a stillborn son in 1733. Barbara suffered from severe asthma for most of her life and in later years became  overweight.  She died at the Royal Palace of Aranjuez , on the outskirts of Madrid on 27 August 1758. Her death was said to have broken her husband's heart.