Sir Joseph Barnby (12 August 1838 – 28 January 1896) was an English musical composer and conductor . Barnby was born at York , as a son of Thomas Barnby, who was an organist . Joseph was a chorister at York Minster from the age of seven, was educated at the Royal Academy of Music under Cipriani Potter and Charles Lucas , and was appointed in 1862 organist of St Andrew's, Wells Street, London,  where he raised the services to a high degree of excellence.  He was conductor of "Barnby's Choir" from 1864, and in 1871 was appointed, in succession to Charles Gounod , conductor of the Royal Albert Hall Choral Society , a post he held till his death. In 1875, he was precentor and director of music at Eton College , and in 1892 became principal of the Guildhall School of Music , receiving the honour of knighthood in July of that year. His works include an oratorio Rebekah , The Lord is King ( Psalm 97 ), many services and anthems , and 246 hymn tunes (published in 1897 in one volume), as well as some partsongs and songs (among them, Now The Day Is Over , and the popular lullaby using Alfred, Lord Tennyson 's words Sweet and Low ) and some pieces for the pipe organ .  He was largely instrumental in stimulating the love for Gounod’s sacred music among the less educated part of the London public, although he displayed little practical sympathy with opera . On the other hand, he organized a remarkable concert performance of Parsifal at the Royal Albert Hall in London in 1884. He conducted the Cardiff Festivals of 1892 and 1895. He died in London and, after a special service in St Paul's Cathedral was buried in West Norwood Cemetery .  A possibly apocryphal story about him got as far as New Zealand: A young  contralto at the end of a Handel solo put in a high note instead of the less effective note usually sung. The conductor, Barnby, was shocked, and asked whether Miss – thought she was right to improve on Handel. "Well, Sir Joseph, said she, I’ve got an 'E' and I don’t see why I shouldn’t show it off". "Miss –," rejoined Barnby, "I believe you have two knees, but I hope you won’t show them off here".  