Nisar Bazmi ( Urdu : نِثار بزمی ‬ ‎), 
(1 December 1924 – 22 March 2007) was a composer and music director of Indian and Pakistan film industry.  Nisar Bazmi remained one of the most famous musicians of South Asia. He also introduced new singers like Alamgir . The duo of composers Laxmikant-Pyarelal were his assistants in India before the independence of Pakistan in 1947.  However, he is primarily remembered for his compositions in the voice of playback singer Ahmed Rushdi . Syed Nisar Ahmed, was the son of Syyed Qudrat Ali . He was born in 1924 in Jalgaon in Khandesh area of Maharashtra state, India. He did not belong to an artistic family. Hence he possessed no prior musical background. Prominent Indian musician of Bombay, Khan Saheb Aman Ali Khan was convinced by Nisar Bazmi's musical interest and taught him music. Equipped with artistic know-how, young Nisar Bazmi, who was just 13 at the time, quickly mastered the various ragas, the musical instruments. In 1939, the "All India Radio" hired him as an artist. In 1944, he composed some songs for a drama, "Nadir Shah Durrani", which was broadcast from the Bombay Radio Station. Bazmi composed music for film "Jamana Paar", which was released in 1946. At this time he also changed his name to Nisar Bazmi. He composed the music for forty films. Twenty eight films were released during his stay in India. The rest of the movies were released in India after he emigrated to Pakistan. His first song in Pakistan was "Mohabbat mei tere" (singers, Ahmed Rushdi, Noor Jahan) for the 1964 film "Aisa bhi hota hai". He also composed many songs for Runa Laila , Ahmed Rushdi , Mehdi Hassan , Faisal Nadeem, Khursheed Nurali (Sheerazi), and Saleem Shahzaad. He had trained many of the modern composers. His closest student/assistant was Badar uz Zaman , the famous classical singer and composer, who remained associated with him for 18 years. Nisar Bazmi received many Nigar Awards for his achievements. Bazmi died on 22 March 2007 in Karachi  .