Ina Boyle (8 March 1889 – 10 March 1967) was an Irish composer – the most prolific and significant female composer from Ireland before 1950.  Boyle was born in Bushey Park near Enniskerry and grew up in a restricted circle of her mother, father and sister. Her first music lessons were with her father William Foster Boyle (1860–1951), who was curate at St. Patrick’s Church, Powerscourt and was given violin and cello lessons by her governess with her younger sister Phyllis. From the age of eleven, she studied theory and harmony with Samuel Myerscough . From 1904 onwards, she also undertook lessons via correspondence with Charles Wood , who was married to Boyle’s cousin Charlotte Georgina Wills-Sandford. In 1910, Boyle began to take lessons with Percy Buck who had just been appointed a non-resident professor of music at Trinity College Dublin . By 1913, Boyle began studying counterpoint, harmony and composition with Charles Herbert Kitson and George Hewson in Dublin .  From 1923, Boyle began to travel to London to take lessons with Ralph Vaughan Williams . After exchanging correspondence, Boyle took her first composition lesson with Vaughan Williams at his home in February 1923.  Because of her isolation, Boyle's music was seldom performed. However, she continued to compose until her death.  Her composition The Magic Harp received a Carnegie Award, and she won an Olympic Honorable Mention in 1948 for Ireland with Lament for Bion , a composition she submitted to the Olympic Cultural Activities Committee.  She died of cancer in Greystones, County Wicklow,  and her papers are archived in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin .  Trinity College has digitised most of her music manuscripts, and they can be searched and studied online . A feature-length documentary about the life and music of Ina Boyle titled From the Darkness was broadcast 12 June 2010 on Ireland's RTÉ Lyric FM . In April and May 2013, an exhibition at Trinity College highlighted "Ina Boyle’s Symphonic Journey" . Opera Choral music Orchestra Voices with orchestra Songs (for voice and piano, if not otherwise mentioned) Ballet scores Chamber music