Tristram Ogilvie Cary , OAM (14 May 1925 – 24 April 2008) was a pioneering English-Australian composer .  He was also active as a teacher and music critic.   Cary was born in Oxford , England, and educated at the Dragon School in Oxford and Westminster School in London. He was the third son and child of a pianist and the novelist Joyce Cary , author of Mister Johnson .   While working as a radar engineer for the Royal Navy during World War II, he independently developed his own conception of electronic and tape music, and is regarded as among the earliest pioneers of these musical forms.  Following World War II, he created one of the first electronic music studios, later travelling around Europe to meet the small numbers of other early pioneers of electronic music and composition. He studied arts at the University of Oxford and went on to study composition, conducting, piano, viola and horn at Trinity College London .  With Peter Zinovieff and David Cockerell , he founded Electronic Music Studios (London) Ltd , which created the first commercially available portable synthesiser, the EMS VCS 3 , and was then involved in production of such distinctive EMS products as the EMS Synthi 100 . In 1967 he created an electronic music studio at the Royal College of Music .  This led to an invitation from the University of Melbourne in 1973 for a lecture tour, which in turn led to an invitation to become the Visiting Composer at the University of Adelaide in 1974. He remained there as a lecturer until 1986. He also wrote music criticism for The Australian .  His concert works of note include a Sonata for guitar (1959), Continuum for tape (1969), a cantata Peccata Mundi (1972), Contours and Densities at First Hill for orchestra (1972), a Nonet (1979), String Quartet No. 2 (1985) and The Dancing Girls for orchestra (1991). Cary is also particularly well known for his film and television music. He wrote music for the science fiction television series Doctor Who (including the first Dalek story  ), as well as the score for the Ealing comedy The Ladykillers (1955).  Later film scores included Quatermass and the Pit (1967) and Blood from the Mummy's Tomb (1971), both for Hammer .  He also composed the score for the ABC TV animated version of A Christmas Carol .  and the children's Animated special Katya and the Nutcracker Cary was one of the first British composers to work in musique concrète . In 1967 he created the first electronic music studio of the Royal College of Music . He built another at his home in Suffolk , which he transported to Australia when he emigrated there, and incorporated it into the University of Adelaide where he worked as a lecturer until 1986.  He provided the visual design for the EMS VCS3 synthesizer.  Cary died in Adelaide , South Australia on 24 April 2008, aged 82.  Cary won the 1977 Albert H. Maggs Composition Award . He was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia in 1991 in recognition of service to music.  He also received the 2005 lifetime achievement award from the Adelaide Critics' Circle for his contribution to music in England and Australia.